PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
25713380	5	2015	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Analysis of 13 cell types reveals evidence for the expression of numerous novel primate- and tissue-specific microRNAs.	Two decades after the discovery of the first animal microRNA (miRNA), the number of miRNAs in animal genomes remains a vexing question. Here, we report findings from analyzing 1,323 short RNA sequencing samples (RNA-seq) from 13 different human tissue types. Using stringent thresholding criteria, we identified 3,707 statistically significant novel mature miRNAs at a false discovery rate of ≤ 0.05 arising from 3,494 novel precursors; 91.5% of these novel miRNAs were identified independently in 10 or more of the processed samples. Analysis of these novel miRNAs revealed tissue-specific dependencies and a commensurate low Jaccard similarity index in intertissue comparisons. Of these novel miRNAs, 1,657 (45%) were identified in 43 datasets that were generated by cross-linking followed by Argonaute immunoprecipitation and sequencing (Ago CLIP-seq) and represented 3 of the 13 tissues, indicating that these miRNAs are active in the RNA interference pathway. Moreover, experimental investigation through stem-loop PCR of a random collection of newly discovered miRNAs in 12 cell lines representing 5 tissues confirmed their presence and tissue dependence. Among the newly identified miRNAs are many novel miRNA clusters, new members of known miRNA clusters, previously unreported products from uncharacterized arms of miRNA precursors, and previously unrecognized paralogues of functionally important miRNA families (e.g., miR-15/107). Examination of the sequence conservation across vertebrate and invertebrate organisms showed 56.7% of the newly discovered miRNAs to be human-specific whereas the majority (94.4%) are primate lineage-specific. Our findings suggest that the repertoire of human miRNAs is far more extensive than currently represented by public repositories and that there is a significant number of lineage- and/or tissue-specific miRNAs that are uncharacterized.
25582079	5	2015	Cell Res	MIWI and piRNA-mediated cleavage of messenger RNAs in mouse testes.	The piRNA machinery is known for its role in mediating epigenetic silencing of transposons. Recent studies suggest that this function also involves piRNA-guided cleavage of transposon-derived transcripts. As many piRNAs also appear to have the capacity to target diverse mRNAs, this raises the intriguing possibility that piRNAs may act extensively as siRNAs to degrade specific mRNAs. To directly test this hypothesis, we compared mouse PIWI (MIWI)-associated piRNAs with experimentally identified cleaved mRNA fragments from mouse testes, and observed cleavage sites that predominantly occur at position 10 from the 5' end of putative targeting piRNAs. We also noted strong biases for U and A residues at nucleotide positions 1 and 10, respectively, in both piRNAs and mRNA fragments, features that resemble the pattern of piRNA amplification by the 'ping-pong' cycle. Through mapping of MIWI-RNA interactions by CLIP-seq and gene expression profiling, we found that many potential piRNA-targeted mRNAs directly interact with MIWI and show elevated expression levels in the testes of Miwi catalytic mutant mice. Reporter-based assays further revealed the importance of base pairing between piRNAs and mRNA targets and the requirement for both the slicer activity and piRNA-loading ability of MIWI in piRNA-mediated target repression. Importantly, we demonstrated that proper turnover of certain key piRNA targets is essential for sperm formation. Together, these findings reveal the siRNA-like function of the piRNA machinery in mouse testes and its central requirement for male germ cell development and maturation.
25768906	2	2015	Cell	Hepatitis C virus RNA functionally sequesters miR-122.	Hepatitis C virus (HCV) uniquely requires the liver-specific microRNA-122 for replication, yet global effects on endogenous miRNA targets during infection are unexplored. Here, high-throughput sequencing and crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) experiments of human Argonaute (AGO) during HCV infection showed robust AGO binding on the HCV 5'UTR at known and predicted miR-122 sites. On the human transcriptome, we observed reduced AGO binding and functional mRNA de-repression of miR-122 targets during virus infection. This miR-122 &quot;sponge&quot; effect was relieved and redirected to miR-15 targets by swapping the miRNA tropism of the virus. Single-cell expression data from reporters containing miR-122 sites showed significant de-repression during HCV infection depending on expression level and site number. We describe a quantitative mathematical model of HCV-induced miR-122 sequestration and propose that such miR-122 inhibition by HCV RNA may result in global de-repression of host miR-122 targets, providing an environment fertile for the long-term oncogenic potential of HCV.
25813040	1	2015	Nucleic Acids Res	Intramolecular circularization increases efficiency of RNA sequencing and enables CLIP-Seq of nuclear RNA from human cells.	RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) is a powerful tool for analyzing the identity of cellular RNAs but is often limited by the amount of material available for analysis. In spite of extensive efforts employing existing protocols, we observed that it was not possible to obtain useful sequencing libraries from nuclear RNA derived from cultured human cells after crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP). Here, we report a method for obtaining strand-specific small RNA libraries for RNA sequencing that requires picograms of RNA. We employ an intramolecular circularization step that increases the efficiency of library preparation and avoids the need for intermolecular ligations of adaptor sequences. Other key features include random priming for full-length cDNA synthesis and gel-free library purification. Using our method, we generated CLIP-Seq libraries from nuclear RNA that had been UV-crosslinked and immunoprecipitated with anti-Argonaute 2 (Ago2) antibody. Computational protocols were developed to enable analysis of raw sequencing data and we observe substantial differences between recognition by Ago2 of RNA species in the nucleus relative to the cytoplasm. This RNA self-circularization approach to RNA sequencing (RC-Seq) allows data to be obtained using small amounts of input RNA that cannot be sequenced by standard methods.
25710169	1	2015	PLoS Pathog	HITS-CLIP analysis uncovers a link between the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF57 protein and host pre-mRNA metabolism.	The Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is an oncogenic virus that causes Kaposi's sarcoma, primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), and some forms of multicentric Castleman's disease. The KSHV ORF57 protein is a conserved posttranscriptional regulator of gene expression that is essential for virus replication. ORF57 is multifunctional, but most of its activities are directly linked to its ability to bind RNA. We globally identified virus and host RNAs bound by ORF57 during lytic reactivation in PEL cells using high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP). As expected, ORF57-bound RNA fragments mapped throughout the KSHV genome, including the known ORF57 ligand PAN RNA. In agreement with previously published ChIP results, we observed that ORF57 bound RNAs near the oriLyt regions of the genome. Examination of the host RNA fragments revealed that a subset of the ORF57-bound RNAs was derived from transcript 5' ends. The position of these 5'-bound fragments correlated closely with the 5'-most exon-intron junction of the pre-mRNA. We selected four candidates (BTG1, EGR1, ZFP36, and TNFSF9) and analyzed their pre-mRNA and mRNA levels during lytic phase. Analysis of both steady-state and newly made RNAs revealed that these candidate ORF57-bound pre-mRNAs persisted for longer periods of time throughout infection than control RNAs, consistent with a role for ORF57 in pre-mRNA metabolism. In addition, exogenous expression of ORF57 was sufficient to increase the pre-mRNA levels and, in one case, the mRNA levels of the putative ORF57 targets. These results demonstrate that ORF57 interacts with specific host pre-mRNAs during lytic reactivation and alters their processing, likely by stabilizing pre-mRNAs. These data suggest that ORF57 is involved in modulating host gene expression in addition to KSHV gene expression during lytic reactivation.
25652745	1	2015	BMC Genomics	CLIPdb: a CLIP-seq database for protein-RNA interactions.	BACKGROUND: RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play essential roles in gene expression regulation through their interactions with RNA transcripts, including coding, canonical non-coding and long non-coding RNAs. Large amounts of crosslinking immunoprecipitation (CLIP)-seq data (including HITS-CLIP, PAR-CLIP, and iCLIP) have been recently produced to reveal transcriptome-wide binding sites of RBPs at the single-nucleotide level.DESCRIPTION: Here, we constructed a database, CLIPdb, to describe RBP-RNA interactions based on 395 publicly available CLIP-seq data sets for 111 RBPs from four organisms: human, mouse, worm and yeast. We consistently annotated the CLIP-seq data sets and RBPs, and developed a user-friendly interface for rapid navigation of the CLIP-seq data. We applied a unified computational method to identify transcriptome-wide binding sites, making the binding sites directly comparable and the data available for integration across different CLIP-seq studies. The high-resolution binding sites of the RBPs can be visualized on the whole-genome scale using a browser. In addition, users can browse and download the identified binding sites of all profiled RBPs by querying genes of interest, including both protein coding genes and non-coding RNAs.CONCLUSION: Manually curated metadata and uniformly identified binding sites of publicly available CLIP-seq data sets will be a foundation for further integrative and comparative analyses. With maintained up-to-date data sets and improved functionality, CLIPdb ( http://clipdb.ncrnalab.org ) will be a valuable resource for improving the understanding of post-transcriptional regulatory networks.
25642422	1	2015	Front Bioeng Biotechnol	Discovery of Protein-lncRNA Interactions by Integrating Large-Scale CLIP-Seq and RNA-Seq Datasets.	Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging as important regulatory molecules in developmental, physiological, and pathological processes. However, the precise mechanism and functions of most of lncRNAs remain largely unknown. Recent advances in high-throughput sequencing of immunoprecipitated RNAs after cross-linking (CLIP-Seq) provide powerful ways to identify biologically relevant protein-lncRNA interactions. In this study, by analyzing millions of RNA-binding protein (RBP) binding sites from 117 CLIP-Seq datasets generated by 50 independent studies, we identified 22,735 RBP-lncRNA regulatory relationships. We found that one single lncRNA will generally be bound and regulated by one or multiple RBPs, the combination of which may coordinately regulate gene expression. We also revealed the expression correlation of these interaction networks by mining expression profiles of over 6000 normal and tumor samples from 14 cancer types. Our combined analysis of CLIP-Seq data and genome-wide association studies data discovered hundreds of disease-related single nucleotide polymorphisms resided in the RBP binding sites of lncRNAs. Finally, we developed interactive web implementations to provide visualization, analysis, and downloading of the aforementioned large-scale datasets. Our study represented an important step in identification and analysis of RBP-lncRNA interactions and showed that these interactions may play crucial roles in cancer and genetic diseases.
25576455	1	2015	Sci China Life Sci	CLIP: viewing the RNA world from an RNA-protein interactome perspective.	The pervasive transcription of the genome creates many types of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). However, we know very little regarding the functions and the regulatory mechanisms of these ncRNAs. Exploring the interactions of RNA and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) is vital because it can allow us to truly understand how these ncRNAs behave in vivo. High-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP or CLIP-seq) and its variants have been successfully used as systemic techniques to study RBP binding sites. In this review, we will explain the major differences between the CLIP techniques, summarize successful applications of these techniques, discuss limitations of CLIP, present some suggested solutions and project their promising future roles in studying the RNA world.
26156524	0	2015	Sci Rep	Regulation rewiring analysis reveals mutual regulation between STAT1 and miR-155-5p in tumor immunosurveillance in seven major cancers.	Transcription factors (TFs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) form a gene regulatory network (GRN) at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level in living cells. However, this network has not been well characterized, especially in regards to the mutual regulations between TFs and miRNAs in cancers. In this study, we collected those regulations inferred by ChIP-Seq or CLIP-Seq to construct the GRN formed by TFs, miRNAs, and target genes. To increase the reliability of the proposed network and examine the regulation activity of TFs and miRNAs, we further incorporated the mRNA and miRNA expression profiles in seven cancer types using The Cancer Genome Atlas data. We observed that regulation rewiring was prevalent during tumorigenesis and found that the rewired regulatory feedback loops formed by TFs and miRNAs were highly associated with cancer. Interestingly, we identified one regulatory feedback loop between STAT1 and miR-155-5p that is consistently activated in all seven cancer types with its function to regulate tumor-related biological processes. Our results provide insights on the losing equilibrium of the regulatory feedback loop between STAT1 and miR-155-5p influencing tumorigenesis.
26121563	0	2015	RNA Biol	Passenger strand loading in overexpression experiments using microRNA mimics.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important regulators of gene function and manipulation of miRNAs is a central component of basic research. Modulation of gene expression by miRNA gain-of-function can be based on different approaches including transfection with miRNA mimics; artificial, chemically modified miRNA-like small RNAs. These molecules are intended to mimic the function of a miRNA guide strand while bypassing the maturation steps of endogenous miRNAs. Due to easy accessibility through commercial providers this approach has gained popularity, and accuracy is often assumed without prior independent testing. Our in silico analysis of over-represented sequence motifs in microarray expression data and sequencing of AGO-associated small RNAs indicate, however, that miRNA mimics may be associated with considerable side-effects due to the unwanted activity of the miRNA mimic complementary strand.
26067606	0	2015	Cell Host Microbe	Temporal Landscape of MicroRNA-Mediated Host-Virus Crosstalk during Productive Human Cytomegalovirus Infection.	Temporal profiles of miRNA activity during productive virus infection can provide fundamental insights into host-virus interactions. Most reported miRNA targetome analyses in the context of virus infection have been performed in latently infected cells and lack reliable models for quantifying the suppression efficacy at specific miRNA target sites. Here, we identified highly competent temporal miRNA targetomes during lytic HCMV infection by using AGO-CLIP-seq together with a bioinformatic method that quantifies miRNA functionality at a specific target site, called ACE-scoring. The repression efficiency at target sites correlates with the magnitude of the ACE-score, and temporal HCMV-encoded miRNA targetomes identified by ACE-scoring were significantly enriched in functional categories involved in pathways central for HCMV biology. Furthermore, comparative analysis between human and viral miRNA targetomes supports the existence of intimate cooperation and co-targeting between them. Our holistic survey provides a valuable resource for understanding host-virus interactions during lytic HCMV infection.
25995189	0	2015	Genes Dev	Position-specific binding of FUS to nascent RNA regulates mRNA length.	More than half of all human genes produce prematurely terminated polyadenylated short mRNAs. However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely elusive. CLIP-seq (cross-linking immunoprecipitation [CLIP] combined with deep sequencing) of FUS (fused in sarcoma) in neuronal cells showed that FUS is frequently clustered around an alternative polyadenylation (APA) site of nascent RNA. ChIP-seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation [ChIP] combined with deep sequencing) of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) demonstrated that FUS stalls RNAP II and prematurely terminates transcription. When an APA site is located upstream of an FUS cluster, FUS enhances polyadenylation by recruiting CPSF160 and up-regulates the alternative short transcript. In contrast, when an APA site is located downstream from an FUS cluster, polyadenylation is not activated, and the RNAP II-suppressing effect of FUS leads to down-regulation of the alternative short transcript. CAGE-seq (cap analysis of gene expression [CAGE] combined with deep sequencing) and PolyA-seq (a strand-specific and quantitative method for high-throughput sequencing of 3' ends of polyadenylated transcripts) revealed that position-specific regulation of mRNA lengths by FUS is operational in two-thirds of transcripts in neuronal cells, with enrichment in genes involved in synaptic activities.
25958398	0	2015	Nucleic Acids Res	Design and bioinformatics analysis of genome-wide CLIP experiments.	The past decades have witnessed a surge of discoveries revealing RNA regulation as a central player in cellular processes. RNAs are regulated by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) at all post-transcriptional stages, including splicing, transportation, stabilization and translation. Defects in the functions of these RBPs underlie a broad spectrum of human pathologies. Systematic identification of RBP functional targets is among the key biomedical research questions and provides a new direction for drug discovery. The advent of cross-linking immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (genome-wide CLIP) technology has recently enabled the investigation of genome-wide RBP-RNA binding at single base-pair resolution. This technology has evolved through the development of three distinct versions: HITS-CLIP, PAR-CLIP and iCLIP. Meanwhile, numerous bioinformatics pipelines for handling the genome-wide CLIP data have also been developed. In this review, we discuss the genome-wide CLIP technology and focus on bioinformatics analysis. Specifically, we compare the strengths and weaknesses, as well as the scopes, of various bioinformatics tools. To assist readers in choosing optimal procedures for their analysis, we also review experimental design and procedures that affect bioinformatics analyses.
25896006	0	2015	Methods Mol Biol	Mapping RNA interactions to proteins in virions using CLIP-Seq.	RNA nanotechnology often involves protein-RNA complexes that require significant understanding of how the proteins and RNAs contact each other. The CLIP-Seq (cross-linking immunoprecipitation, and DNA sequencing) protocol can be used to probe the RNA molecules that interact with proteins. We have optimized the procedures for RNA fragmentation, immunoprecipitation, and library construction in CLIP-Seq to map the interactions between the RNA and the capsid of a simple positive-strand RNA virus. The results show that distinct portions of the viral RNA contact the capsid. The protocol should be applicable to other RNA virions and also RNA-protein nanoparticles.
25892335	0	2015	RNA Biol	Global insights into alternative polyadenylation regulation.	Alternative pre-mRNA processing greatly increases the coding capacity of the human genome and regulatory factors involved in RNA processing play critical roles in tissue development and maintenance. Indeed, abnormal functions of RNA processing factors have been associated with a wide range of human diseases from cancer to neurodegenerative disorders. While many studies have emphasized the importance of alternative splicing (AS), recent high-throughput sequencing efforts have also allowed global surveys of alternative polyadenylation (APA). For the majority of pre-mRNAs, as well as some non-coding transcripts such as lncRNAs, APA selects different 3'-ends and thus modulates the availability of regulatory sites recognized by trans-acting regulatory effectors, including miRs and RNA binding proteins (RBPs). Here, we compare the available technologies for assessing global polyadenylation patterns, summarize the roles of auxiliary factors on APA, and discuss the impact of differential polyA site (pA) selection in the determination of cell fate, transformation and disease.
25883322	0	2015	Genome Res	Antagonistic regulation of mRNA expression and splicing by CELF and MBNL proteins.	RNA binding proteins of the conserved CUGBP1, Elav-like factor (CELF) family contribute to heart and skeletal muscle development and are implicated in myotonic dystrophy (DM). To understand their genome-wide functions, we analyzed the transcriptome dynamics following induction of CELF1 or CELF2 in adult mouse heart and of CELF1 in muscle by RNA-seq, complemented by crosslinking/immunoprecipitation-sequencing (CLIP-seq) analysis of mouse cells and tissues to distinguish direct from indirect regulatory targets. We identified hundreds of mRNAs bound in their 3' UTRs by both CELF1 and the developmentally induced MBNL1 protein, a threefold greater overlap in target messages than expected, including messages involved in development and cell differentiation. The extent of 3' UTR binding by CELF1 and MBNL1 predicted the degree of mRNA repression or stabilization, respectively, following CELF1 induction. However, CELF1's RNA binding specificity in vitro was not detectably altered by coincubation with recombinant MBNL1. These findings support a model in which CELF and MBNL proteins bind independently to mRNAs but functionally compete to specify down-regulation or localization/stabilization, respectively, of hundreds of mRNA targets. Expression of many alternative 3' UTR isoforms was altered following CELF1 induction, with 3' UTR binding associated with down-regulation of isoforms and genes. The splicing of hundreds of alternative exons was oppositely regulated by these proteins, confirming an additional layer of regulatory antagonism previously observed in a handful of cases. The regulatory relationships between CELFs and MBNLs in control of both mRNA abundance and splicing appear to have evolved to enhance developmental transitions in major classes of heart and muscle genes.
25827894	0	2015	Methods Mol Biol	Transcriptome-wide identification of in vivo interactions between RNAs and RNA-binding proteins by RIP and PAR-CLIP assays.	Comprehensive genomic and computational studies in the era of high-throughput sequencing revealed that the major proportion of the human genome is transcribed. This novel insight confronted the scientific community with new questions concerning the expanded role of RNA, especially noncoding RNA (ncRNA), in cellular pathways. In recent years, there has been mounting evidence that ncRNAs and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) are involved in a wide range of biological processes, such as developmental transitions, cell differentiation, stress response, genome organization, and regulation of gene expression. In particular, in the chromatin field long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have drawn increasing attention to their function in epigenetic regulation due to the fact that they were found to interact with multiple chromatin regulators and modifiers. Recently, techniques to study the extent of RNA-protein interactions have been developed in many research laboratories. Here we describe protocols for RNA Immunoprecipitation-Sequencing (RIP-Seq) and Photoactivatable-Ribonucleoside-Enhanced Cross-linking and Immunoprecipitation combined with deep sequencing (PAR-CLIP-Seq) to identify RNA targets of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) on a transcriptome-wide level, discussing advantages and drawbacks.
25805859	0	2015	RNA	A novel mechanism of LIN-28 regulation of let-7 microRNA expression revealed by in vivo HITS-CLIP in C. elegans.	The evolutionarily conserved gene lin-28 encodes an RNA-binding protein and is an important regulator of the proper temporal succession of several developmental events in both invertebrates and vertebrates. At the cellular level, LIN-28 promotes stemness and proliferation, and inhibits differentiation, a feature best illustrated by its ability to induce pluripotency when ectopically expressed in human fibroblasts in combination with NANOG, OCT4, and SOX2. Mammalian LIN28 functions in part by regulating processing of the let-7 microRNA through a GGAG binding site in the pre-let-7's distal loop region. However, many human and animal let-7 precursors lack the GGAG binding motif. In order to dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying its biological functions in a living animal, we identified a map of LIN-28 interactions with the transcriptome by in vivo HITS-CLIP in Caenorhabditis elegans. LIN-28 binds a large pool of messenger RNAs, and a substantial fraction of the bona fide LIN-28 targets are involved in aspects of animal development. Furthermore, our data show that LIN-28 regulates the expression of the let-7 microRNA by binding its primary transcript in a previously unknown region, revealing a novel regulatory mechanism.
25791598	0	2015	Methods Mol Biol	CLIP-seq to discover transcriptome-wide imprinting of RNA binding proteins in living cells.	UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation coupled to high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq) is used to characterize RNA targets of RNA binding proteins (RBP) in a large scale manner. This powerful method allows the stringent purification of direct RNA binding sites of RBPs in living cells. Here, we describe in detail the protocol we employed to identify RNA targets of the human RNA helicase eIF4AIII.
25789151	0	2015	Mol Autism	Fmrp targets or not: long, highly brain-expressed genes tend to be implicated in autism and brain disorders.	BACKGROUND: Many studies have demonstrated a robust statistical overlap between genes whose transcripts are reported as Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein (Fmrp)-binding targets and genes implicated in various psychiatric disorders, including autism. However, it is not clear how to interpret this overlap as the Fmrp protein itself is not considered to be central to all instances of these conditions.FINDINGS: We tested whether Fmrp binding may be a proxy for some other features of these transcripts. Reviewing recent literature on the cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP)-derived targets of Fmrp in the brain, and the literature on identifying genes thought to mediate autism and other psychiatric disorders, reveals that both appear to be disproportionately made up of highly brain-expressed genes. This suggests a parsimonious explanation-that the overlap between Fmrp targets and neuropsychiatric candidate genes might be secondary to simple features such as transcript length and robust expression in the brain. Indeed, reanalyzing Fmrp high-throughput sequencing of RNAs isolated by CLIP (HITS-CLIP) data suggests that approximately 60% of CLIP tag depth can be predicted by gene expression, coding sequence length, and transcript length. Furthermore, there is a statistically significant overlap between autism candidate genes and random samples of long, highly brain-expressed genes, whether they are Fmrp targets or not.CONCLUSIONS: Comparison of known Fmrp-binding targets to candidate gene lists should be informed by both of these features.
25751603	0	2015	Nat Commun	Genomic analysis of ADAR1 binding and its involvement in multiple RNA processing pathways.	Adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADARs) are the primary factors underlying adenosine to inosine (A-to-I) editing in metazoans. Here we report the first global study of ADAR1-RNA interaction in human cells using CLIP-seq. A large number of CLIP sites are observed in Alu repeats, consistent with ADAR1's function in RNA editing. Surprisingly, thousands of other CLIP sites are located in non-Alu regions, revealing functional and biophysical targets of ADAR1 in the regulation of alternative 3' UTR usage and miRNA biogenesis. We observe that binding of ADAR1 to 3' UTRs precludes binding by other factors, causing 3' UTR lengthening. Similarly, ADAR1 interacts with DROSHA and DGCR8 in the nucleus and possibly out-competes DGCR8 in primary miRNA binding, which enhances mature miRNA expression. These functions are dependent on ADAR1's editing activity, at least for a subset of targets. Our study unfolds a broad landscape of the functional roles of ADAR1.
25737553	0	2015	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Oncogenic fusion protein EWS-FLI1 is a network hub that regulates alternative splicing.	The synthesis and processing of mRNA, from transcription to translation initiation, often requires splicing of intragenic material. The final mRNA composition varies based on proteins that modulate splice site selection. EWS-FLI1 is an Ewing sarcoma (ES) oncoprotein with an interactome that we demonstrate to have multiple partners in spliceosomal complexes. We evaluate the effect of EWS-FLI1 on posttranscriptional gene regulation using both exon array and RNA-seq. Genes that potentially regulate oncogenesis, including CLK1, CASP3, PPFIBP1, and TERT, validate as alternatively spliced by EWS-FLI1. In a CLIP-seq experiment, we find that EWS-FLI1 RNA-binding motifs most frequently occur adjacent to intron-exon boundaries. EWS-FLI1 also alters splicing by directly binding to known splicing factors including DDX5, hnRNP K, and PRPF6. Reduction of EWS-FLI1 produces an isoform of γ-TERT that has increased telomerase activity compared with wild-type (WT) TERT. The small molecule YK-4-279 is an inhibitor of EWS-FLI1 oncogenic function that disrupts specific protein interactions, including helicases DDX5 and RNA helicase A (RHA) that alters RNA-splicing ratios. As such, YK-4-279 validates the splicing mechanism of EWS-FLI1, showing alternatively spliced gene patterns that significantly overlap with EWS-FLI1 reduction and WT human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC). Exon array analysis of 75 ES patient samples shows similar isoform expression patterns to cell line models expressing EWS-FLI1, supporting the clinical relevance of our findings. These experiments establish systemic alternative splicing as an oncogenic process modulated by EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 modulation of mRNA splicing may provide insight into the contribution of splicing toward oncogenesis, and, reciprocally, EWS-FLI1 interactions with splicing proteins may inform the splicing code.
25707768	0	2015	BMC Genomics	Integrated analyses to reconstruct microRNA-mediated regulatory networks in mouse liver using high-throughput profiling.	BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) simultaneously target many transcripts through partial complementarity binding, and have emerged as a key type of post-transcriptional regulator for gene expression. How miRNA accomplishes its pleiotropic effects largely depends on its expression and its target repertoire. Previous studies discovered thousands of miRNAs and numerous miRNA target genes mainly through computation and prediction methods which produced high rates of false positive prediction. The development of Argonaute cross-linked immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-Seq) provides a system to effectively determine miRNA target genes. Likewise, the accuracy of dissecting the transcriptional regulation of miRNA genes has been greatly improved by chromatin immunoprecipitation of the transcription factors coupled with sequencing (ChIP-Seq). Elucidation of the miRNA target repertoire will provide an in-depth understanding of the functional roles of microRNA pathways. To reliably reconstruct a miRNA-mediated regulatory network, we established a computational framework using publicly available, sequence-based transcription factor-miRNA databases, including ChIPBase and TransmiR for the TF-miRNA interactions, along with miRNA-target databases, including miRTarBase, TarBase and starBase, for the miRNA-target interactions. We applied the computational framework to elucidate the miRNA-mediated regulatory network in the Mir122a⁻/⁻ mouse model, which has an altered transcriptome and progressive liver disease.RESULTS: We applied our computational framework to the expression profiles of miRNA/mRNA of Mir122a⁻/⁻ mutant mice and wild-type mice. The miRNA-mediated network involves 40 curated TFs contributing to the aberrant expression of 65 miRNAs and 723 curated miRNA target genes, of which 56% was found in the differentially-expressed genes of Mir122a--mice. Hence, the regulatory network disclosed previously-known and also many previously-unidentified miRNA-mediated regulations in mutant mice. Moreover, we demonstrate that loss of imprinting at the chromosome 12qF1 region is associated with miRNA overexpression in human hepatocellular carcinoma and stem cells, suggesting initiation of precancerous changes in young mice deficient in miR-122. A group of 9 miRNAs was found to share miR-122 target genes, indicating synergy between miRNAs and target genes by way of multiplicity and cooperativity.CONCLUSIONS: The study provides significant insight into miRNA-mediated regulatory networks. Based on experimentally verified data, this network is highly reliable and effective in revealing previously-undetermined disease-associated molecular mechanisms. This computational framework can be applied to explore the significant TF-miRNA-miRNA target interactions in any complex biological systems with high degrees of confidence.
25707620	0	2015	BMC Genomics	Connecting rules from paired miRNA and mRNA expression data sets of HCV patients to detect both inverse and positive regulatory relationships.	BACKGROUND: Intensive research based on the inverse expression relationship has been undertaken to discover the miRNA-mRNA regulatory modules involved in the infection of Hepatitis C virus (HCV), the leading cause of chronic liver diseases. However, biological studies in other fields have found that inverse expression relationship is not the only regulatory relationship between miRNAs and their targets, and some miRNAs can positively regulate a mRNA by binding at the 5' UTR of the mRNA.RESULTS: This work focuses on the detection of both inverse and positive regulatory relationships from a paired miRNA and mRNA expression data set of HCV patients through a 'change-to-change' method which can derive connected discriminatory rules. Our study uncovered many novel miRNA-mRNA regulatory modules. In particular, it was revealed that GFRA2 is positively regulated by miR-557, miR-765 and miR-17-3p that probably bind at different locations of the 5' UTR of this mRNA. The expression relationship between GFRA2 and any of these three miRNAs has not been studied before, although separate research for this gene and these miRNAs have all drawn conclusions linked to hepatocellular carcinoma. This suggests that the binding of mRNA GFRA2 with miR-557, miR-765, or miR-17-3p, or their combinations, is worthy of further investigation by experimentation. We also report another mRNA QKI which has a strong inverse expression relationship with miR-129 and miR-493-3p which may bind at the 3' UTR of QKI with a perfect sequence match. Furthermore, the interaction between hsa-miR-129-5p (previous ID: hsa-miR-129) and QKI is supported with CLIP-Seq data from starBase. Our method can be easily extended for the expression data analysis of other diseases.CONCLUSION: Our rule discovery method is useful for integrating binding information and expression profile for identifying HCV miRNA-mRNA regulatory modules and can be applied to the study of the expression profiles of other complex human diseases.
25648438	0	2015	Pathol Oncol Res	Identification of Target Genes Regulated by KSHV miRNAs in KSHV-Infected Lymphoma Cells.	This study aimed to identify target genes regulated by KSHV miRNAs in KSHV-infected lymphoma cells. Original Ago HITS-CLIP data of BC-3 and BCBL-1 cell lines were downloaded from SRA database in NCBI, including mRNA and miRNA samples. The raw mRNA reads were mapped into human reference genome hg19 via TopHat for read alignment. PCR duplicates were removed via the SAM tool and the peaks of reads were analyzed via Cufflinks. For miRNA data, the raw data were mapped to the mature miRNA sequences based on miRBase via Bowtie. Peak intersection was computed by using intersectBed in BEDtools. Then, the mature miRNA seeds were identified and then were aligned with 3' UTR merged peaks. The regulationships of miRNAs and their corresponding genes were analyzed based on the signal of RNA-induced silencing complex. Totally, 7 KSHV-related genes regulated by KSHV miRNAs were identified, including IPO5, EDA, NT5C3, WSB1, KCNS1, PRAM1 and MTRNR2L6. Among them, EDA, MTRNR2L6 and IPO5 were regulated by multiple KSHV miRNAs, such as kshv-miR-K12-1-5p, kshv-miR-K12-4-3p and kshv-miR-K12-3-5p, respectively. Furthermore, expression of kshv-miR-K12-1-5p and kshv-miR-K12-3-5p in BCBL-1 cell line were lower than that in BC-3 cell line, conversely, expression of kshv-miR-K12-4-3p in BCBL-1 cell line were higher than that in BC-3 cell line. In conclusion, potential target genes regulated by KSHV miRNAs in KSHV-infected lymphoma cells might play key roles in the nosogenesis of this disease. These findings might provide the basis for deep understanding of KSHV-infected tumors and further molecular experiments.
25572935	0	2015	Genome Biol	Transposable elements modulate human RNA abundance and splicing via specific RNA-protein interactions.	BACKGROUND: Transposable elements (TEs) have significantly influenced the evolution of transcriptional regulatory networks in the human genome. Post-transcriptional regulation of human genes by TE-derived sequences has been observed in specific contexts, but has yet to be systematically and comprehensively investigated. Here, we study a collection of 75 CLIP-Seq experiments mapping the RNA binding sites for a diverse set of 51 human proteins to explore the role of TEs in post-transcriptional regulation of human mRNAs and lncRNAs via RNA-protein interactions.RESULTS: We detect widespread interactions between RNA binding proteins (RBPs) and many families of TE-derived sequence in the CLIP-Seq data. Further, alignment coverage peaks on specific positions of the TE consensus sequences, illuminating a diversity of TE-specific RBP binding motifs. Evidence of binding and conservation of these motifs in the nonrepetitive transcriptome suggests that TEs have generally appropriated existing sequence preferences of the RBPs. Depletion assays for numerous RBPs show that TE-derived binding sites affect transcript abundance and splicing similarly to nonrepetitive sites. However, in a few cases the effect of RBP binding depends on the specific TE family bound; for example, the ubiquitously expressed RBP HuR confers transcript stability unless bound to an Alu element.CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis suggests a widespread role for TEs in shaping RNA-protein regulatory networks in the human genome.
24374217	19	2014	Cell Metab	Epigenetic regulation of the DLK1-MEG3 microRNA cluster in human type 2 diabetic islets.	Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a complex disease characterized by the inability of the insulin-producing β cells in the endocrine pancreas to overcome insulin resistance in peripheral tissues. To determine if microRNAs are involved in the pathogenesis of human T2DM, we sequenced the small RNAs of human islets from diabetic and nondiabetic organ donors. We identified a cluster of microRNAs in an imprinted locus on human chromosome 14q32 that is highly and specifically expressed in human β cells and dramatically downregulated in islets from T2DM organ donors. The downregulation of this locus strongly correlates with hypermethylation of its promoter. Using HITS-CLIP for the essential RISC-component Argonaute, we identified disease-relevant targets of the chromosome 14q32 microRNAs, such as IAPP and TP53INP1, that cause increased β cell apoptosis upon overexpression in human islets. Our results support a role for microRNAs and their epigenetic control by DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of T2DM.
24613350	17	2014	Cell Rep	HITS-CLIP and integrative modeling define the Rbfox splicing-regulatory network linked to brain development and autism.	The RNA binding proteins Rbfox1/2/3 regulate alternative splicing in the nervous system, and disruption of Rbfox1 has been implicated in autism. However, comprehensive identification of functional Rbfox targets has been challenging. Here, we perform HITS-CLIP for all three Rbfox family members in order to globally map, at a single-nucleotide resolution, their in vivo RNA interaction sites in the mouse brain. We find that the two guanines in the Rbfox binding motif UGCAUG are critical for protein-RNA interactions and crosslinking. Using integrative modeling, these interaction sites, combined with additional datasets, define 1,059 direct Rbfox target alternative splicing events. Over half of the quantifiable targets show dynamic changes during brain development. Of particular interest are 111 events from 48 candidate autism-susceptibility genes, including syndromic autism genes Shank3, Cacna1c, and Tsc2. Alteration of Rbfox targets in some autistic brains is correlated with downregulation of all three Rbfox proteins, supporting the potential clinical relevance of the splicing-regulatory network.
24837674	12	2014	Mol Cell	RNA Bind-n-Seq: quantitative assessment of the sequence and structural binding specificity of RNA binding proteins.	Specific protein-RNA interactions guide posttranscriptional gene regulation. Here, we describe RNA Bind-n-Seq (RBNS), a method that comprehensively characterizes sequence and structural specificity of RNA binding proteins (RBPs), and its application to the developmental alternative splicing factors RBFOX2, CELF1/CUGBP1, and MBNL1. For each factor, we recovered both canonical motifs and additional near-optimal binding motifs. RNA secondary structure inhibits binding of RBFOX2 and CELF1, while MBNL1 favors unpaired Us but tolerates C/G pairing in motifs containing UGC and/or GCU. Dissociation constants calculated from RBNS data using a novel algorithm correlated highly with values measured by surface plasmon resonance. Motifs identified by RBNS were conserved, were bound and active in vivo, and distinguished the subset of motifs enriched by CLIP-Seq that had regulatory activity. Together, our data demonstrate that RBNS complements crosslinking-based methods and show that in vivo binding and activity of these splicing factors is driven largely by intrinsic RNA affinity.
24389009	10	2014	Neuron	Transcriptome-wide discovery of microRNA binding sites in human brain.	The orchestration of brain function requires complex gene regulatory networks that are modulated, in part, by microRNAs (miRNAs). These noncoding RNAs associate with argonaute (Ago) proteins in order to direct posttranscriptional gene suppression via base pairing with target transcripts. In order to better understand how miRNAs contribute to human-specialized brain processes and neurological phenotypes, identifying their targets is of paramount importance. Here, we address the latter by profiling Ago2:RNA interactions using HITS-CLIP to generate a transcriptome-wide map of miRNA binding sites in human brain. We uncovered ∼ 7,000 stringent Ago2 binding sites that are highly enriched for conserved sequences corresponding to abundant brain miRNAs. This interactome points to functional miRNA:target pairs across &gt;3,000 genes and represents a valuable resource for accelerating our understanding of miRNA functions in brain. We demonstrate the utility of this map for exploring clinically relevant miRNA binding sites that may facilitate the translation of genetic studies of complex neuropsychiatric diseases into therapeutics.
24407355	9	2014	Nat Protoc	Mapping Argonaute and conventional RNA-binding protein interactions with RNA at single-nucleotide resolution using HITS-CLIP and CIMS analysis.	The identification of sites where RNA-binding proteins (RNABPs) interact with target RNAs opens the door to understanding the vast complexity of RNA regulation. UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) is a transformative technology in which RNAs purified from in vivo cross-linked RNA-protein complexes are sequenced to reveal footprints of RNABP:RNA contacts. CLIP combined with high-throughput sequencing (HITS-CLIP) is a generalizable strategy to produce transcriptome-wide maps of RNA binding with higher accuracy and resolution than standard RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) profiling or purely computational approaches. The application of CLIP to Argonaute proteins has expanded the utility of this approach to mapping binding sites for microRNAs and other small regulatory RNAs. Finally, recent advances in data analysis take advantage of cross-link-induced mutation sites (CIMS) to refine RNA-binding maps to single-nucleotide resolution. Once IP conditions are established, HITS-CLIP takes ∼8 d to prepare RNA for sequencing. Established pipelines for data analysis, including those for CIMS, take 3-4 d.
25036633	7	2014	Cell	APC is an RNA-binding protein, and its interactome provides a link to neural development and microtubule assembly.	Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is a microtubule plus-end scaffolding protein important in biology and disease. APC is implicated in RNA localization, although the mechanisms and functional significance remain unclear. We show APC is an RNA-binding protein and identify an RNA interactome by HITS-CLIP. Targets were highly enriched for APC-related functions, including microtubule organization, cell motility, cancer, and neurologic disease. Among the targets is β2B-tubulin, known to be required in human neuron and axon migration. We show β2B-tubulin is synthesized in axons and localizes preferentially to dynamic microtubules in the growth cone periphery. APC binds the β2B-tubulin 3' UTR; experiments interfering with this interaction reduced β2B-tubulin mRNA axonal localization and expression, depleted dynamic microtubules and the growth cone periphery, and impaired neuron migration. These results identify APC as a platform binding functionally related protein and RNA networks, and suggest a self-organizing model for the microtubule to localize synthesis of its own subunits.
24696455	7	2014	Genes Dev	CTCF regulates the human p53 gene through direct interaction with its natural antisense transcript, Wrap53.	The multifunctional CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) protein exhibits a broad range of functions, including that of insulator and higher-order chromatin organizer. We found that CTCF comprises a previously unrecognized region that is necessary and sufficient to bind RNA (RNA-binding region [RBR]) and is distinct from its DNA-binding domain. Depletion of cellular CTCF led to a decrease in not only levels of p53 mRNA, as expected, but also those of Wrap53 RNA, an antisense transcript originated from the p53 locus. PAR-CLIP-seq (photoactivatable ribonucleoside-enhanced cross-linking and immunoprecipitation [PAR-CLIP] combined with deep sequencing) analyses indicate that CTCF binds a multitude of transcripts genome-wide as well as to Wrap53 RNA. Apart from its established role at the p53 promoter, CTCF regulates p53 expression through its physical interaction with Wrap53 RNA. Cells harboring a CTCF mutant in its RBR exhibit a defective p53 response to DNA damage. Moreover, the RBR facilitates CTCF multimerization in an RNA-dependent manner, which may bear directly on its role in establishing higher-order chromatin structures in vivo.
24451213	7	2014	Genome Biol	PIPE-CLIP: a comprehensive online tool for CLIP-seq data analysis.	CLIP-seq is widely used to study genome-wide interactions between RNA-binding proteins and RNAs. However, there are few tools available to analyze CLIP-seq data, thus creating a bottleneck to the implementation of this methodology. Here, we present PIPE-CLIP, a Galaxy framework-based comprehensive online pipeline for reliable analysis of data generated by three types of CLIP-seq protocol: HITS-CLIP, PAR-CLIP and iCLIP. PIPE-CLIP provides both data processing and statistical analysis to determine candidate cross-linking regions, which are comparable to those regions identified from the original studies or using existing computational tools. PIPE-CLIP is available at http://pipeclip.qbrc.org/.
24398258	7	2014	Genome Biol	dCLIP: a computational approach for comparative CLIP-seq analyses.	Although comparison of RNA-protein interaction profiles across different conditions has become increasingly important to understanding the function of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), few computational approaches have been developed for quantitative comparison of CLIP-seq datasets. Here, we present an easy-to-use command line tool, dCLIP, for quantitative CLIP-seq comparative analysis. The two-stage method implemented in dCLIP, including a modified MA normalization method and a hidden Markov model, is shown to be able to effectively identify differential binding regions of RBPs in four CLIP-seq datasets, generated by HITS-CLIP, iCLIP and PAR-CLIP protocols. dCLIP is freely available at http://qbrc.swmed.edu/software/.
24813212	6	2014	Bioinformatics	lncRNAtor: a comprehensive resource for functional investigation of long non-coding RNAs.	MOTIVATION: A number of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been identified by deep sequencing methods, but their molecular and cellular functions are known only for a limited number of lncRNAs. Current databases on lncRNAs are mostly for cataloging purpose without providing in-depth information required to infer functions. A comprehensive resource on lncRNA function is an immediate need.RESULTS: We present a database for functional investigation of lncRNAs that encompasses annotation, sequence analysis, gene expression, protein binding and phylogenetic conservation. We have compiled lncRNAs for six species (human, mouse, zebrafish, fruit fly, worm and yeast) from ENSEMBL, HGNC, MGI and lncRNAdb. Each lncRNA was analyzed for coding potential and phylogenetic conservation in different lineages. Gene expression data of 208 RNA-Seq studies (4995 samples), collected from GEO, ENCODE, modENCODE and TCGA databases, were used to provide expression profiles in various tissues, diseases and developmental stages. Importantly, we analyzed RNA-Seq data to identify coexpressed mRNAs that would provide ample insights on lncRNA functions. The resulting gene list can be subject to enrichment analysis such as Gene Ontology or KEGG pathways. Furthermore, we compiled protein-lncRNA interactions by collecting and analyzing publicly available CLIP-seq or PAR-CLIP sequencing data. Finally, we explored evolutionarily conserved lncRNAs with correlated expression between human and six other organisms to identify functional lncRNAs. The whole contents are provided in a user-friendly web interface.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: lncRNAtor is available at http://lncrnator.ewha.ac.kr/.SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
25183524	4	2014	Nucleic Acids Res	MBNL proteins and their target RNAs, interaction and splicing regulation.	Muscleblind-like (MBNL) proteins are key regulators of precursor and mature mRNA metabolism in mammals. Based on published and novel data, we explore models of tissue-specific MBNL interaction with RNA. We portray MBNL domains critical for RNA binding and splicing regulation, and the structure of MBNL's normal and pathogenic RNA targets, particularly in the context of myotonic dystrophy (DM), in which expanded CUG or CCUG repeat transcripts sequester several nuclear proteins including MBNLs. We also review the properties of MBNL/RNA complex, including recent data obtained from UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP-Seq), and discuss how this interaction shapes normal MBNL-dependent alternative splicing regulation. Finally, we review how this acquired knowledge about the pathogenic RNA structure and nature of MBNL sequestration can be translated into the design of therapeutic strategies against DM.
25069772	4	2014	EMBO J	Genome-wide identification of miR-200 targets reveals a regulatory network controlling cell invasion.	The microRNAs of the miR-200 family maintain the central characteristics of epithelia and inhibit tumor cell motility and invasiveness. Using the Ago-HITS-CLIP technology for transcriptome-wide identification of direct microRNA targets in living cells, along with extensive validation to verify the reliability of the approach, we have identified hundreds of miR-200a and miR-200b targets, providing insights into general features of miRNA target site selection. Gene ontology analysis revealed a predominant effect of miR-200 targets in widespread coordinate control of actin cytoskeleton dynamics. Functional characterization of the miR-200 targets indicates that they constitute subnetworks that underlie the ability of cancer cells to migrate and invade, including coordinate effects on Rho-ROCK signaling, invadopodia formation, MMP activity, and focal adhesions. Thus, the miR-200 family maintains the central characteristics of the epithelial phenotype by acting on numerous targets at multiple levels, encompassing both cytoskeletal effectors that control actin filament organization and dynamics, and upstream signals that locally regulate the cytoskeleton to maintain cell morphology and prevent cell migration.
24853928	4	2014	Nat Protoc	Motif-based analysis of large nucleotide data sets using MEME-ChIP.	MEME-ChIP is a web-based tool for analyzing motifs in large DNA or RNA data sets. It can analyze peak regions identified by ChIP-seq, cross-linking sites identified by CLIP-seq and related assays, as well as sets of genomic regions selected using other criteria. MEME-ChIP performs de novo motif discovery, motif enrichment analysis, motif location analysis and motif clustering, providing a comprehensive picture of the DNA or RNA motifs that are enriched in the input sequences. MEME-ChIP performs two complementary types of de novo motif discovery: weight matrix-based discovery for high accuracy; and word-based discovery for high sensitivity. Motif enrichment analysis using DNA or RNA motifs from human, mouse, worm, fly and other model organisms provides even greater sensitivity. MEME-ChIP's interactive HTML output groups and aligns significant motifs to ease interpretation. This protocol takes less than 3 h, and it provides motif discovery approaches that are distinct and complementary to other online methods.
24725595	4	2014	Mol Cell	Alternative capture of noncoding RNAs or protein-coding genes by herpesviruses to alter host T cell function.	In marmoset T cells transformed by Herpesvirus saimiri (HVS), a viral U-rich noncoding (nc) RNA, HSUR 1, specifically mediates degradation of host microRNA-27 (miR-27). High-throughput sequencing of RNA after crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) identified mRNAs targeted by miR-27 as enriched in the T cell receptor (TCR) signaling pathway, including GRB2. Accordingly, transfection of miR-27 into human T cells attenuates TCR-induced activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and induction of CD69. MiR-27 also robustly regulates SEMA7A and IFN-γ, key modulators and effectors of T cell function. Knockdown or ectopic expression of HSUR 1 alters levels of these proteins in virally transformed cells. Two other T-lymphotropic γ-herpesviruses, AlHV-1 and OvHV-2, do not produce a noncoding RNA to downregulate miR-27 but instead encode homologs of miR-27 target genes. Thus, oncogenic γ-herpesviruses have evolved diverse strategies to converge on common targets in host T cells.
24499931	4	2014	PLoS Comput Biol	De novo prediction of PTBP1 binding and splicing targets reveals unexpected features of its RNA recognition and function.	The splicing regulator Polypyrimidine Tract Binding Protein (PTBP1) has four RNA binding domains that each binds a short pyrimidine element, allowing recognition of diverse pyrimidine-rich sequences. This variation makes it difficult to evaluate PTBP1 binding to particular sites based on sequence alone and thus to identify target RNAs. Conversely, transcriptome-wide binding assays such as CLIP identify many in vivo targets, but do not provide a quantitative assessment of binding and are informative only for the cells where the analysis is performed. A general method of predicting PTBP1 binding and possible targets in any cell type is needed. We developed computational models that predict the binding and splicing targets of PTBP1. A Hidden Markov Model (HMM), trained on CLIP-seq data, was used to score probable PTBP1 binding sites. Scores from this model are highly correlated (ρ = -0.9) with experimentally determined dissociation constants. Notably, we find that the protein is not strictly pyrimidine specific, as interspersed Guanosine residues are well tolerated within PTBP1 binding sites. This model identifies many previously unrecognized PTBP1 binding sites, and can score PTBP1 binding across the transcriptome in the absence of CLIP data. Using this model to examine the placement of PTBP1 binding sites in controlling splicing, we trained a multinomial logistic model on sets of PTBP1 regulated and unregulated exons. Applying this model to rank exons across the mouse transcriptome identifies known PTBP1 targets and many new exons that were confirmed as PTBP1-repressed by RT-PCR and RNA-seq after PTBP1 depletion. We find that PTBP1 dependent exons are diverse in structure and do not all fit previous descriptions of the placement of PTBP1 binding sites. Our study uncovers new features of RNA recognition and splicing regulation by PTBP1. This approach can be applied to other multi-RRM domain proteins to assess binding site degeneracy and multifactorial splicing regulation.
24447569	4	2014	Genome Biol	CapR: revealing structural specificities of RNA-binding protein target recognition using CLIP-seq data.	RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) bind to their target RNA molecules by recognizing specific RNA sequences and structural contexts. The development of CLIP-seq and related protocols has made it possible to exhaustively identify RNA fragments that bind to RBPs. However, no efficient bioinformatics method exists to reveal the structural specificities of RBP-RNA interactions using these data. We present CapR, an efficient algorithm that calculates the probability that each RNA base position is located within each secondary structural context. Using CapR, we demonstrate that several RBPs bind to their target RNA molecules under specific structural contexts. CapR is available at https://sites.google.com/site/fukunagatsu/software/capr.
25411354	3	2014	RNA	Dissecting noncoding and pathogen RNA-protein interactomes.	RNA-protein interactions are central to biological regulation. Cross-linking immunoprecipitation (CLIP)-seq is a powerful tool for genome-wide interrogation of RNA-protein interactomes, but current CLIP methods are limited by challenging biochemical steps and fail to detect many classes of noncoding and nonhuman RNAs. Here we present FAST-iCLIP, an integrated pipeline with improved CLIP biochemistry and an automated informatic pipeline for comprehensive analysis across protein coding, noncoding, repetitive, retroviral, and nonhuman transcriptomes. FAST-iCLIP of Poly-C binding protein 2 (PCBP2) showed that PCBP2-bound CU-rich motifs in different topologies to recognize mRNAs and noncoding RNAs with distinct biological functions. FAST-iCLIP of PCBP2 in hepatitis C virus-infected cells enabled a joint analysis of the PCBP2 interactome with host and viral RNAs and their interplay. These results show that FAST-iCLIP can be used to rapidly discover and decipher mechanisms of RNA-protein recognition across the diversity of human and pathogen RNAs.
25263597	3	2014	Mol Cell	Loss of MBNL leads to disruption of developmentally regulated alternative polyadenylation in RNA-mediated disease.	Inhibition of muscleblind-like (MBNL) activity due to sequestration by microsatellite expansion RNAs is a major pathogenic event in the RNA-mediated disease myotonic dystrophy (DM). Although MBNL1 and MBNL2 bind to nascent transcripts to regulate alternative splicing during muscle and brain development, another major binding site for the MBNL protein family is the 3' untranslated region of target RNAs. Here, we report that depletion of Mbnl proteins in mouse embryo fibroblasts leads to misregulation of thousands of alternative polyadenylation events. HITS-CLIP and minigene reporter analyses indicate that these polyadenylation switches are a direct consequence of MBNL binding to target RNAs. Misregulated alternative polyadenylation also occurs in skeletal muscle in a mouse polyCUG model and human DM, resulting in the persistence of neonatal polyadenylation patterns. These findings reveal an additional developmental function for MBNL proteins and demonstrate that DM is characterized by misregulation of pre-mRNA processing at multiple levels.
25083871	3	2014	Cell	MicroRNA directly enhances mitochondrial translation during muscle differentiation.	MicroRNAs are well known to mediate translational repression and mRNA degradation in the cytoplasm. Various microRNAs have also been detected in membrane-compartmentalized organelles, but the functional significance has remained elusive. Here, we report that miR-1, a microRNA specifically induced during myogenesis, efficiently enters the mitochondria where it unexpectedly stimulates, rather than represses, the translation of specific mitochondrial genome-encoded transcripts. We show that this positive effect requires specific miR:mRNA base-pairing and Ago2, but not its functional partner GW182, which is excluded from the mitochondria. We provide evidence for the direct action of Ago2 in mitochondrial translation by crosslinking immunoprecipitation coupled with deep sequencing (CLIP-seq), functional rescue with mitochondria-targeted Ago2, and selective inhibition of the microRNA machinery in the cytoplasm. These findings unveil a positive function of microRNA in mitochondrial translation and suggest a highly coordinated myogenic program via miR-1-mediated translational stimulation in the mitochondria and repression in the cytoplasm.
24960161	3	2014	J Clin Invest	RNA-binding protein RBM20 represses splicing to orchestrate cardiac pre-mRNA processing.	Mutations in the gene encoding the RNA-binding protein RBM20 have been implicated in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), a major cause of chronic heart failure, presumably through altering cardiac RNA splicing. Here, we combined transcriptome-wide crosslinking immunoprecipitation (CLIP-seq), RNA-seq, and quantitative proteomics in cell culture and rat and human hearts to examine how RBM20 regulates alternative splicing in the heart. Our analyses revealed the presence of a distinct RBM20 RNA-recognition element that is predominantly found within intronic binding sites and linked to repression of exon splicing with RBM20 binding near 3' and 5' splice sites. Proteomic analysis determined that RBM20 interacts with both U1 and U2 small nuclear ribonucleic particles (snRNPs) and suggested that RBM20-dependent splicing repression occurs through spliceosome stalling at complex A. Direct RBM20 targets included several genes previously shown to be involved in DCM as well as genes not typically associated with this disease. In failing human hearts, reduced expression of RBM20 affected alternative splicing of several direct targets, indicating that differences in RBM20 expression may affect cardiac function. Together, these findings identify RBM20-regulated targets and provide insight into the pathogenesis of human heart failure.
24813895	3	2014	Cell Rep	Regulation of FAS exon definition and apoptosis by the Ewing sarcoma protein.	The Ewing sarcoma protein EWS is an RNA and DNA binding protein implicated in transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, and DNA damage response. Using CLIP-seq, we identified EWS RNA binding sites in exonic regions near 5' splice sites. A prominent target was exon 6 of the FAS/CD95 receptor, which is alternatively spliced to generate isoforms with opposing activities in programmed cell death. Depletion and overexpression experiments showed that EWS promotes exon 6 inclusion and consequently the synthesis of the proapoptotic FAS/CD95 isoform, whereas an EWS-FLI1 fusion protein characteristic of Ewing sarcomas shows decreased activity. Biochemical analyses revealed that EWS binding promotes the recruitment of U1snRNP and U2AF65 to the splice sites flanking exon 6 and therefore exon definition. Consistent with a role for EWS in the regulation of programmed cell death, cells depleted of EWS show decreased sensitivity to FAS-induced apoptosis, and elevated EWS expression enhances apoptosis in EWS-haploinsufficient Ewing sarcoma cells.
24714572	3	2014	PLoS One	A model-based approach to identify binding sites in CLIP-Seq data.	Cross-linking immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-Seq) has made it possible to identify the targeting sites of RNA-binding proteins in various cell culture systems and tissue types on a genome-wide scale. Here we present a novel model-based approach (MiClip) to identify high-confidence protein-RNA binding sites from CLIP-seq datasets. This approach assigns a probability score for each potential binding site to help prioritize subsequent validation experiments. The MiClip algorithm has been tested in both HITS-CLIP and PAR-CLIP datasets. In the HITS-CLIP dataset, the signal/noise ratios of miRNA seed motif enrichment produced by the MiClip approach are between 17% and 301% higher than those by the ad hoc method for the top 10 most enriched miRNAs. In the PAR-CLIP dataset, the MiClip approach can identify ∼50% more validated binding targets than the original ad hoc method and two recently published methods. To facilitate the application of the algorithm, we have released an R package, MiClip (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MiClip/index.html), and a public web-based graphical user interface software (http://galaxy.qbrc.org/tool_runner?tool_id=mi_clip) for customized analysis.
24708042	3	2014	Mol Microbiol	Global effects of the DEAD-box RNA helicase DeaD (CsdA) on gene expression over a broad range of temperatures.	In Escherichia coli, activity of the global regulatory RNA binding protein CsrA is antagonized by two non-coding sRNAs, CsrB and CsrC, which sequester it away from its lower affinity mRNA targets. Transcription of csrB/C requires the BarA-UvrY two component signal transduction system, which responds to short chain carboxylates. We show that two DEAD-box RNA helicases, DeaD and SrmB, activate csrB/C expression by different pathways. DeaD facilitates uvrY translation by counteracting the inhibitory effect of long distance base-pairing between the uvrY mRNA leader and coding region, while SrmB does not affect UvrY or UvrY-phosphate levels. Contrary to the prevailing notion that these helicases act primarily at low temperatures, DeaD and SrmB activated csrB expression over a wide temperature range. High-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) revealed in vivo interactions of DeaD with 39 mRNAs, including those of uvrY and 9 other regulatory genes. Studies on the expression of several of the identified genes revealed regulatory effects of DeaD in all cases and diverse temperature response patterns. Our findings uncover an expanded regulatory role for DeaD, which is mediated through novel mRNA targets, important global regulators and under physiological conditions that were considered to be incompatible with its function.
25398902	2	2014	Nucleic Acids Res	YM500v2: a small RNA sequencing (smRNA-seq) database for human cancer miRNome research.	We previously presented YM500, which is an integrated database for miRNA quantification, isomiR identification, arm switching discovery and novel miRNA prediction from 468 human smRNA-seq datasets. Here in this updated YM500v2 database (http://ngs.ym.edu.tw/ym500/), we focus on the cancer miRNome to make the database more disease-orientated. New miRNA-related algorithms developed after YM500 were included in YM500v2, and, more significantly, more than 8000 cancer-related smRNA-seq datasets (including those of primary tumors, paired normal tissues, PBMC, recurrent tumors, and metastatic tumors) were incorporated into YM500v2. Novel miRNAs (miRNAs not included in the miRBase R21) were not only predicted by three independent algorithms but also cleaned by a new in silico filtration strategy and validated by wetlab data such as Cross-Linked ImmunoPrecipitation sequencing (CLIP-seq) to reduce the false-positive rate. A new function 'Meta-analysis' is additionally provided for allowing users to identify real-time differentially expressed miRNAs and arm-switching events according to customer-defined sample groups and dozens of clinical criteria tidying up by proficient clinicians. Cancer miRNAs identified hold the potential for both basic research and biotech applications.
25126784	2	2014	Cell	Stem-loop recognition by DDX17 facilitates miRNA processing and antiviral defense.	DEAD-box helicases play essential roles in RNA metabolism across species, but emerging data suggest that they have additional functions in immunity. Through RNAi screening, we identify an evolutionarily conserved and interferon-independent role for the DEAD-box helicase DDX17 in restricting Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV), a mosquito-transmitted virus in the bunyavirus family that causes severe morbidity and mortality in humans and livestock. Loss of Drosophila DDX17 (Rm62) in cells and flies enhanced RVFV infection. Similarly, depletion of DDX17 but not the related helicase DDX5 increased RVFV replication in human cells. Using crosslinking immunoprecipitation high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq), we show that DDX17 binds the stem loops of host pri-miRNA to facilitate their processing and also an essential stem loop in bunyaviral RNA to restrict infection. Thus, DDX17 has dual roles in the recognition of stem loops: in the nucleus for endogenous microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis and in the cytoplasm for surveillance against structured non-self-elements.
25087086	2	2014	Cell Biochem Biophys	Bioinformatics method to predict two regulation mechanism: TF-miRNA-mRNA and lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA in pancreatic cancer.	Altered expressions of microRNAs (miRNAs) are reported in pancreatic cancer and associate with cancer pathogenesis, apoptosis, and cell growth, thereby functioning as either tumor suppressors or oncogenes. However, the majority of studies focus on defining the regulatory functions of miRNAs, whereas few investigations are directed toward assessing how the miRNA themselves are transcriptionally regulated. In this study, integration of published multi-level expression data and bioinformatics computational approach was used to predict two regulation mechanisms: transcription factors (TF)-miRNA-mRNA regulation and long non-coding RNA(lncRNA)-miRNA-mRNA regulation. To identify differentially expressed mRNAs, miRNAs, and lncRNAs, we integrated microarray expression data in pancreatic cancer tissues and normal tissues. Combination of differentially expressed mRNAs and miRNAs with miRNA-mRNA interactions based on crosslinking and immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-Seq) data from StarBas, we constructed miRNA-mRNA regulatory network. Then we constructed two regulatory networks including TF-miRNA-mRNA and lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA based on chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-Seq) data from ChIPBase and CLIP-Seq data. A total of 4385 mRNAs, 500 miRNAs, and 21 lncRNAs were differentially expressed, of which, 18 mRNAs and 54 miRNAs are with high confidence. In miRNA-mRNA regulatory network, interrelated miRNAs target 1701 differentially regulated mRNAs. By constructing regulatory network, 19miRNAs including hsa-miR-137, hsa-miR-206, hsa-miR-429, hsa-miR-320d, and hsa-miR-320c are predicted to participate in lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA regulation. Furthermore, 8 miRNAs including hsa-mir-137, hsa-mir-206, hsa-mir-429, hsa-mir-375, hsa-mir-326, hsa-mir-217, hsa-mir-301b, and hsa-mir-184 are predicted to participate in TF-miRNA-mRNA regulation. In an integrated data analysis, we reveal large-scale effects of interrelated miRNAs and provide a model for predicting the mechanism of miRNAs disorder. Our study provides a new insight into understanding the transcriptional regulation of pancreatic cancer.
24898756	2	2014	Elife	Loss of the multifunctional RNA-binding protein RBM47 as a source of selectable metastatic traits in breast cancer.	The mechanisms through which cancer cells lock in altered transcriptional programs in support of metastasis remain largely unknown. Through integrative analysis of clinical breast cancer gene expression datasets, cell line models of breast cancer progression, and mutation data from cancer genome resequencing studies, we identified RNA binding motif protein 47 (RBM47) as a suppressor of breast cancer progression and metastasis. RBM47 inhibited breast cancer re-initiation and growth in experimental models. Transcriptome-wide HITS-CLIP analysis revealed widespread RBM47 binding to mRNAs, most prominently in introns and 3'UTRs. RBM47 altered splicing and abundance of a subset of its target mRNAs. Some of the mRNAs stabilized by RBM47, as exemplified by dickkopf WNT signaling pathway inhibitor 1, inhibit tumor progression downstream of RBM47. Our work identifies RBM47 as an RNA-binding protein that can suppress breast cancer progression and demonstrates how the inactivation of a broadly targeted RNA chaperone enables selection of a pro-metastatic state.
25505146	1	2014	Nucleic Acids Res	Leveraging cross-link modification events in CLIP-seq for motif discovery.	High-throughput protein-RNA interaction data generated by CLIP-seq has provided an unprecedented depth of access to the activities of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), the key players in co- and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Motif discovery forms part of the necessary follow-up data analysis for CLIP-seq, both to refine the exact locations of RBP binding sites, and to characterize them. The specific properties of RBP binding sites, and the CLIP-seq methods, provide additional information not usually present in the classic motif discovery problem: the binding site structure, and cross-linking induced events in reads. We show that CLIP-seq data contains clear secondary structure signals, as well as technology- and RBP-specific cross-link signals. We introduce Zagros, a motif discovery algorithm specifically designed to leverage this information and explore its impact on the quality of recovered motifs. Our results indicate that using both secondary structure and cross-link modifications can greatly improve motif discovery on CLIP-seq data. Further, the motifs we recover provide insight into the balance between sequence- and structure-specificity struck by RBP binding.
25336930	1	2014	Bioinform Biol Insights	Computational Methods for CLIP-seq Data Processing.	RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are at the core of post-transcriptional regulation and thus of gene expression control at the RNA level. One of the principal challenges in the field of gene expression regulation is to understand RBPs mechanism of action. As a result of recent evolution of experimental techniques, it is now possible to obtain the RNA regions recognized by RBPs on a transcriptome-wide scale. In fact, CLIP-seq protocols use the joint action of CLIP, crosslinking immunoprecipitation, and high-throughput sequencing to recover the transcriptome-wide set of interaction regions for a particular protein. Nevertheless, computational methods are necessary to process CLIP-seq experimental data and are a key to advancement in the understanding of gene regulatory mechanisms. Considering the importance of computational methods in this area, we present a review of the current status of computational approaches used and proposed for CLIP-seq data.
25103560	1	2014	Sci Rep	Argonaute CLIP-Seq reveals miRNA targetome diversity across tissue types.	To date, analyses of individual targets have provided evidence of a miRNA targetome that extends beyond the boundaries of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and can involve non-Watson-Crick base pairing in the miRNA seed region. Here we report our findings from analyzing 34 Argonaute HITS-CLIP datasets from several human and mouse cell types. Investigation of the architectural (i.e. bulge vs. contiguous pairs) and sequence (Watson-Crick vs. G:U pairs) preferences for human and mouse miRNAs revealed that many heteroduplexes are &quot;non-canonical&quot; i.e. their seed region comprises G:U and bulge combinations. The genomic distribution of miRNA targets differed distinctly across cell types but remained congruent across biological replicates of the same cell type. For some cell types intergenic and intronic targets were more frequent whereas in other cell types mRNA targets prevailed. The findings suggest an expanded model of miRNA targeting that is more frequent than the standard model currently in use. Lastly, our analyses of data from different cell types and laboratories revealed consistent Ago-loaded miRNA profiles across replicates whereas, unexpectedly, the Ago-loaded targets exhibited a much more dynamic behavior across biological replicates.
25027052	1	2014	Cell Tissue Res	RNA-binding protein research with transcriptome-wide technologies in neural development.	An increasing number of studies have demonstrated that neural RNA-binding proteins (nRNABPs) participate in several steps of neural development through post-transcriptional regulation of their RNA targets (Grabowski Curr Opin Genet Dev 21:388-394, 2011). Classical genetics and in vitro biochemical approaches have identified several important RNA targets of nRNABPs linked to cell-fate decision and neuronal functions. In recent years, new technologies, such as unbiased in vivo protein-RNA interaction approaches, high-throughput sequencing-cross-linked immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP), microarrays, RNAseq and others, have been developed. The use of these with genetics has succeeded in defining a dynamic range of RNA targets of RNABPs at the transcriptome-wide level. This new platform also provides the mechanistic insights into a specific biological function of nRNABPs. This review highlights the discoveries and challenges of the interplay between the nRNABPs and their biological functions in neural development.
24906430	1	2014	Breast Cancer Res Treat	HITS-CLIP reveals key regulators of nuclear receptor signaling in breast cancer.	miRNAs regulate the expression of genes in both normal physiology and disease. While miRNAs have been demonstrated to play a pivotal role in aspects of cancer biology, these reports have generally focused on the regulation of single genes. Such single-gene approaches have significant limitations, relying on miRNA expression levels and heuristic predictions of mRNA-binding sites. This results in only circumstantial evidence of miRNA-target interaction and typically leads to large numbers of false positive predictions. Here, we used a genome-wide approach (high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by crosslinking immunoprecipitation, HITS-CLIP) to define direct miRNA-mRNA interactions in three breast cancer subtypes (estrogen receptor positive, Her2 amplified, and triple negative). Focusing on steroid receptor signaling, we identified two novel regulators of the ER pathway (miR-9-5p and miR-193a/b-3p), which together target multiple genes involved in ER signaling. Moreover, this approach enabled the definition of miR-9-5p as a global regulator of steroid receptor signaling in breast cancer. We show that miRNA targets and networks defined by HITS-CLIP under physiologic conditions are predictive of patient outcomes and provide global insight into miRNA regulation in breast cancer.
24940765	0	2014	Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr	HITS-CLIP and PAR-CLIP advance viral miRNA targetome analysis.	MiRNAs regulate gene expression by binding predominantly to the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of target transcripts to prevent their translation and/or induce target degradation. In addition to the more than 1200 human miRNAs, human DNA tumor viruses such as Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) encode miRNAs. Target predictions indicate that each miRNA targets hundreds of transcripts, many of which are regulated by multiple miRNAs. Thus, target identification is a big challenge for the field. Most methods used currently investigate single miRNA-target interactions and are not able to analyze complex miRNA-target networks. To overcome these challenges, cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP), a recently developed method to study direct RNA-protein interactions in living cells, has been successfully applied to miRNA target analysis. It utilizes Argonaute (Ago)-immunoprecipitation to isolate native Ago-miRNA-mRNA complexes. In four recent publications, two variants of the CLIP method (HITS-CLIP and PAR-CLIP) were utilized to determine the targetomes of human and viral miRNAs in cells infected with the gamma-herpesviruses KSHV and EBV, which are associated with a number of human cancers. Here, we briefly introduce herpesvirus-encoded miRNAs and then focus on how CLIP technology has largely impacted our understanding of viral miRNAs in viral biology and pathogenesis.
24668253	0	2014	Mol Biosyst	MIROR: a method for cell-type specific microRNA occupancy rate prediction.	MicroRNA (miRNA) regulation is highly cell-type specific. It is sensitive to both the miRNA-mRNA relative abundance and the competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA) effect. However, almost all existing miRNA target prediction methods neglected the influence of the cellular environment when analyzing miRNA regulation effects. In this study, we proposed a method, MIROR (miRNA Occupancy Rate predictor), to predict miRNA regulation intensity in a given cell type. The major considerations were the miRNA-mRNA relative abundance and the endogenous competition between different mRNA species. The output of MIROR is the predicted miRNA occupancy rates of each target site. The predicted results significantly correlated with Ago HITS-CLIP experiment that indicated miRNA binding intensities. When applied to the analysis of the breast invasive carcinoma dataset, MIROR identified a number of differentially regulated miRNA-mRNA pairs with significant miRNA occupancy rate changes between tumor and normal tissues. Many of the predictions were supported by previous research studies, including the ones without a significant change in the mRNA expression level. These results indicate that MIROR provides a novel strategy to study the miRNA differential regulation in different cell types.
24622240	0	2014	PLoS One	Microarray meta-analysis of RNA-binding protein functions in alternative polyadenylation.	Alternative polyadenylation (APA) is a post-transcriptional mechanism to generate diverse mRNA transcripts with different 3'UTRs from the same gene. In this study, we systematically searched for the APA events with differential expression in public mouse microarray data. Hundreds of genes with over-represented differential APA events and the corresponding experiments were identified. We further revealed that global APA differential expression occurred prevalently in tissues such as brain comparing to peripheral tissues, and biological processes such as development, differentiation and immune responses. Interestingly, we also observed widespread differential APA events in RNA-binding protein (RBP) genes such as Rbm3, Eif4e2 and Elavl1. Given the fact that RBPs are considered as the main regulators of differential APA expression, we constructed a co-expression network between APAs and RBPs using the microarray data. Further incorporation of CLIP-seq data of selected RBPs showed that Nova2 represses and Mbnl1 promotes the polyadenylation of closest poly(A) sites respectively. Altogether, our study is the first microarray meta-analysis in a mammal on the regulation of APA by RBPs that integrated massive mRNA expression data under a wide-range of biological conditions. Finally, we present our results as a comprehensive resource in an online website for the research community.
24590791	0	2014	Methods Mol Biol	High-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) to determine sites of binding of CstF-64 on nascent RNAs.	Genome-wide analysis of gene expression has changed the RNA world. Recent techniques leading to this revolution have been the use of cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) combined with high-throughput sequencing (HITS-CLIP) to determine sites on nascent mRNAs to which RNA-binding proteins bind. Several researchers (including us) have been examining the role of RNA-binding proteins in polyadenylation, including the role of the 64,000 Mr component of the cleavage stimulation factor, CstF-64. In this chapter, we present our optimizations of the CLIP procedure for examination of CstF-64 binding to nascent pre-mRNAs expressed in testis. For CstF-64 CLIP, we use a well-characterized monoclonal antibody (3A7) that recognizes CstF-64. Rather than optimizing tricky but essential RNA fragment cloning schemes, we illustrate the use of the proprietary Illumina TruSeq Small RNA Sample Preparation kit for this step. Other techniques such as SDS-PAGE and the transfer to the nitrocellulose membrane techniques follow the original Illumina protocol (though we point out potential pitfalls). Finally, we discuss the options for high-throughput sequencing and some general suggestions for bioinformatic analysis of the data.
24297251	53	2013	Nucleic Acids Res	starBase v2.0: decoding miRNA-ceRNA, miRNA-ncRNA and protein-RNA interaction networks from large-scale CLIP-Seq data.	Although microRNAs (miRNAs), other non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) (e.g. lncRNAs, pseudogenes and circRNAs) and competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) have been implicated in cell-fate determination and in various human diseases, surprisingly little is known about the regulatory interaction networks among the multiple classes of RNAs. In this study, we developed starBase v2.0 (http://starbase.sysu.edu.cn/) to systematically identify the RNA-RNA and protein-RNA interaction networks from 108 CLIP-Seq (PAR-CLIP, HITS-CLIP, iCLIP, CLASH) data sets generated by 37 independent studies. By analyzing millions of RNA-binding protein binding sites, we identified ∼9000 miRNA-circRNA, 16 000 miRNA-pseudogene and 285,000 protein-RNA regulatory relationships. Moreover, starBase v2.0 has been updated to provide the most comprehensive CLIP-Seq experimentally supported miRNA-mRNA and miRNA-lncRNA interaction networks to date. We identified ∼10,000 ceRNA pairs from CLIP-supported miRNA target sites. By combining 13 functional genomic annotations, we developed miRFunction and ceRNAFunction web servers to predict the function of miRNAs and other ncRNAs from the miRNA-mediated regulatory networks. Finally, we developed interactive web implementations to provide visualization, analysis and downloading of the aforementioned large-scale data sets. This study will greatly expand our understanding of ncRNA functions and their coordinated regulatory networks.
23562324	20	2013	Mol Cell	Genome-wide analysis reveals SR protein cooperation and competition in regulated splicing.	SR proteins are well-characterized RNA binding proteins that promote exon inclusion by binding to exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs). However, it has been unclear whether regulatory rules deduced on model genes apply generally to activities of SR proteins in the cell. Here, we report global analyses of two prototypical SR proteins, SRSF1 (SF2/ASF) and SRSF2 (SC35), using splicing-sensitive arrays and CLIP-seq on mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs). Unexpectedly, we find that these SR proteins promote both inclusion and skipping of exons in vivo, but their binding patterns do not explain such opposite responses. Further analyses reveal that loss of one SR protein is accompanied by coordinated loss or compensatory gain in the interaction of other SR proteins at the affected exons. Therefore, specific effects on regulated splicing by one SR protein actually depend on a complex set of relationships with multiple other SR proteins in mammalian genomes.
23766421	17	2013	Genome Res	Global analyses of UPF1 binding and function reveal expanded scope of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.	UPF1 is a DNA/RNA helicase with essential roles in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) and embryonic development. How UPF1 regulates target abundance and the relationship between NMD and embryogenesis are not well understood. To explore how NMD shapes the embryonic transcriptome, we integrated genome-wide analyses of UPF1 binding locations, NMD-regulated gene expression, and translation in murine embryonic stem cells (mESCs). We identified over 200 direct UPF1 binding targets using crosslinking/immunoprecipitation-sequencing (CLIP-seq) and revealed a repression pathway that involves 3' UTR binding by UPF1 and translation but is independent of canonical targeting features involving 3' UTR length and stop codon placement. Interestingly, NMD targeting of this set of mRNAs occurs in other mouse tissues and is conserved in human. We also show, using ribosome footprint profiling, that actively translated upstream open reading frames (uORFs) are enriched in transcription factor mRNAs and predict mRNA repression by NMD, while poorly translated mRNAs escape repression. Together, our results identify novel NMD determinants and targets and provide context for understanding the impact of UPF1 and NMD on the mESC transcriptome.
24204307	12	2013	PLoS Genet	ALS-associated FUS mutations result in compromised FUS alternative splicing and autoregulation.	The gene encoding a DNA/RNA binding protein FUS/TLS is frequently mutated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Mutations commonly affect its carboxy-terminal nuclear localization signal, resulting in varying deficiencies of FUS nuclear localization and abnormal cytoplasmic accumulation. Increasing evidence suggests deficiencies in FUS nuclear function may contribute to neuron degeneration. Here we report a novel FUS autoregulatory mechanism and its deficiency in ALS-associated mutants. Using FUS CLIP-seq, we identified significant FUS binding to a highly conserved region of exon 7 and the flanking introns of its own pre-mRNAs. We demonstrated that FUS is a repressor of exon 7 splicing and that the exon 7-skipped splice variant is subject to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). Overexpression of FUS led to the repression of exon 7 splicing and a reduction of endogenous FUS protein. Conversely, the repression of exon 7 was reduced by knockdown of FUS protein, and moreover, it was rescued by expression of EGFP-FUS. This dynamic regulation of alternative splicing describes a novel mechanism of FUS autoregulation. Given that ALS-associated FUS mutants are deficient in nuclear localization, we examined whether cells expressing these mutants would be deficient in repressing exon 7 splicing. We showed that FUS harbouring R521G, R522G or ΔExon15 mutation (minor, moderate or severe cytoplasmic localization, respectively) directly correlated with respectively increasing deficiencies in both exon 7 repression and autoregulation of its own protein levels. These data suggest that compromised FUS autoregulation can directly exacerbate the pathogenic accumulation of cytoplasmic FUS protein in ALS. We showed that exon 7 skipping can be induced by antisense oligonucleotides targeting its flanking splice sites, indicating the potential to alleviate abnormal cytoplasmic FUS accumulation in ALS. Taken together, FUS autoregulation by alternative splicing provides insight into a molecular mechanism by which FUS-regulated pre-mRNA processing can impact a significant number of targets important to neurodegeneration.
23389473	12	2013	RNA	FUS regulates genes coding for RNA-binding proteins in neurons by binding to their highly conserved introns.	Dominant mutations and mislocalization or aggregation of Fused in Sarcoma (FUS), an RNA-binding protein (RBP), cause neuronal degeneration in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD), two incurable neurological diseases. However, the function of FUS in neurons is not well understood. To uncover the impact of FUS in the neuronal transcriptome, we used high-throughput sequencing of immunoprecipitated and cross-linked RNA (HITS-CLIP) of FUS in human brains and mouse neurons differentiated from embryonic stem cells, coupled with RNA-seq and FUS knockdowns. We report conserved neuronal RNA targets and networks that are regulated by FUS. We find that FUS regulates splicing of genes coding for RBPs by binding to their highly conserved introns. Our findings have important implications for understanding the impact of FUS in neurodegenerative diseases and suggest that perturbations of FUS can impact the neuronal transcriptome via perturbations of RBP transcripts.
23597149	11	2013	BMC Genomics	Dynamic recruitment of microRNAs to their mRNA targets in the regenerating liver.	BACKGROUND: Validation of physiologic miRNA targets has been met with significant challenges. We employed HITS-CLIP to identify which miRNAs participate in liver regeneration, and to identify their target mRNAs.RESULTS: miRNA recruitment to the RISC is highly dynamic, changing more than five-fold for several miRNAs. miRNA recruitment to the RISC did not correlate with changes in overall miRNA expression for these dynamically recruited miRNAs, emphasizing the necessity to determine miRNA recruitment to the RISC in order to fully assess the impact of miRNA regulation. We incorporated RNA-seq quantification of total mRNA to identify expression-weighted Ago footprints, and developed a microRNA regulatory element (MRE) prediction algorithm that represents a greater than 20-fold refinement over computational methods alone. These high confidence MREs were used to generate candidate 'competing endogenous RNA' (ceRNA) networks.CONCLUSION: HITS-CLIP analysis provide novel insights into global miRNA:mRNA relationships in the regenerating liver.
24142874	7	2013	Genes Dev	LIN28B promotes growth and tumorigenesis of the intestinal epithelium via Let-7.	The RNA-binding proteins LIN28A and LIN28B have diverse functions in embryonic stem cells, cellular reprogramming, growth, and oncogenesis. Many of these effects occur via direct inhibition of Let-7 microRNAs (miRNAs), although Let-7-independent effects have been surmised. We report that intestine targeted expression of LIN28B causes intestinal hypertrophy, crypt expansion, and Paneth cell loss. Furthermore, LIN28B fosters intestinal polyp and adenocarcinoma formation. To examine potential Let-7-independent functions of LIN28B, we pursued ribonucleoprotein cross-linking, immunoprecipitation, and high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq) to identify direct RNA targets. This revealed that LIN28B bound a substantial number of mRNAs and modestly augmented protein levels of these target mRNAs in vivo. Conversely, Let-7 had a profound effect; modulation of Let-7 levels via deletion of the mirLet7c2/mirLet7b genes recapitulated effects of Lin28b overexpression. Furthermore, intestine-specific Let-7 expression could reverse hypertrophy and Paneth cell depletion caused by Lin28b. This was independent of effects on insulin-PI3K-mTOR signaling. Our study reveals that Let-7 miRNAs are critical for repressing intestinal tissue growth and promoting Paneth cell differentiation. Let-7-dependent effects of LIN28B may supersede Let-7-independent effects on intestinal tissue growth. In summary, LIN28B can definitively act as an oncogene in the absence of canonical genetic alterations.
23359859	7	2013	Elife	NOVA-dependent regulation of cryptic NMD exons controls synaptic protein levels after seizure.	The neuronal RNA binding protein NOVA regulates splicing, shuttles to the cytoplasm, and co-localizes with target transcripts in dendrites, suggesting links between splicing and local translation. Here we identified &gt;200 transcripts showing NOVA-dependent changes in abundance, but, surprisingly, HITS-CLIP revealed NOVA binds these RNAs in introns rather than 3' UTRs. This led us to discover NOVA-regulated splicing of cryptic exons within these introns. These exons triggered nonsense mediated decay (NMD), as UPF1 and protein synthesis were required for NOVA's effect on RNA levels. Their regulation was dynamic and physiologically relevant. The NMD exons were regulated by seizures, which also induced changes in Nova subcellular localization and mediated large changes in synaptic proteins, including proteins implicated in familial epilepsy. Moreover, Nova haploinsufficient mice had spontaneous epilepsy. The data reveal a hidden means of dynamic RNA regulation linking electrical activity to splicing and protein output, and of mediating homeostatic excitation/inhibition balance in neurons.DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00178.001.
23863141	6	2013	Biochem Soc Trans	Cellular functions of the microprocessor.	The microprocessor is a complex comprising the RNase III enzyme Drosha and the double-stranded RNA-binding protein DGCR8 (DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8 gene) that catalyses the nuclear step of miRNA (microRNA) biogenesis. DGCR8 recognizes the RNA substrate, whereas Drosha functions as an endonuclease. Recent global analyses of microprocessor and Dicer proteins have suggested novel functions for these components independent of their role in miRNA biogenesis. A HITS-CLIP (high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by cross-linking immunoprecipitation) experiment designed to identify novel substrates of the microprocessor revealed that this complex binds and regulates a large variety of cellular RNAs. The microprocessor-mediated cleavage of several classes of RNAs not only regulates transcript levels, but also modulates alternative splicing events, independently of miRNA function. Importantly, DGCR8 can also associate with other nucleases, suggesting the existence of alternative DGCR8 complexes that may regulate the fate of a subset of cellular RNAs. The aim of the present review is to provide an overview of the diverse functional roles of the microprocessor.
23824327	6	2013	Genes Dev	Remodeling of Ago2-mRNA interactions upon cellular stress reflects miRNA complementarity and correlates with altered translation rates.	When adapting to environmental stress, cells attenuate and reprogram their translational output. In part, these altered translation profiles are established through changes in the interactions between RNA-binding proteins and mRNAs. The Argonaute 2 (Ago2)/microRNA (miRNA) machinery has been shown to participate in stress-induced translational up-regulation of a particular mRNA, CAT-1; however, a detailed, transcriptome-wide understanding of the involvement of Ago2 in the process has been lacking. Here, we profiled the overall changes in Ago2-mRNA interactions upon arsenite stress by cross-linking immunoprecipitation (CLIP) followed by high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq). Ago2 displayed a significant remodeling of its transcript occupancy, with the majority of 3' untranslated region (UTR) and coding sequence (CDS) sites exhibiting stronger interaction. Interestingly, target sites that were destined for release from Ago2 upon stress were depleted in miRNA complementarity signatures, suggesting an alternative mode of interaction. To compare the changes in Ago2-binding patterns across transcripts with changes in their translational states, we measured mRNA profiles on ribosome/polysome gradients by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Increased Ago2 occupancy correlated with stronger repression of translation for those mRNAs, as evidenced by a shift toward lighter gradient fractions upon stress, while release of Ago2 was associated with the limited number of transcripts that remained translated. Taken together, these data point to a role for Ago2 and the mammalian miRNAs in mediating the translational component of the stress response.
23368412	6	2013	BMC Genomics	A computational approach for identifying microRNA-target interactions using high-throughput CLIP and PAR-CLIP sequencing.	BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a critical role in down-regulating gene expression. By coupling with Argonaute family proteins, miRNAs bind to target sites on mRNAs and employ translational repression. A large amount of miRNA-target interactions (MTIs) have been identified by the crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) and the photoactivatable-ribonucleoside-enhanced CLIP (PAR-CLIP) along with the next-generation sequencing (NGS). PAR-CLIP shows high efficiency of RNA co-immunoprecipitation, but it also lead to T to C conversion in miRNA-RNA-protein crosslinking regions. This artificial error obviously reduces the mappability of reads. However, a specific tool to analyze CLIP and PAR-CLIP data that takes T to C conversion into account is still in need.RESULTS: We herein propose the first CLIP and PAR-CLIP sequencing analysis platform specifically for miRNA target analysis, namely miRTarCLIP. From scratch, it automatically removes adaptor sequences from raw reads, filters low quality reads, reverts C to T, aligns reads to 3'UTRs, scans for read clusters, identifies high confidence miRNA target sites, and provides annotations from external databases. With multi-threading techniques and our novel C to T reversion procedure, miRTarCLIP greatly reduces the running time comparing to conventional approaches. In addition, miRTarCLIP serves with a web-based interface to provide better user experiences in browsing and searching targets of interested miRNAs. To demonstrate the superior functionality of miRTarCLIP, we applied miRTarCLIP to two public available CLIP and PAR-CLIP sequencing datasets. miRTarCLIP not only shows comparable results to that of other existing tools in a much faster speed, but also reveals interesting features among these putative target sites. Specifically, we used miRTarCLIP to disclose that T to C conversion within position 1-7 and that within position 8-14 of miRNA target sites are significantly different (p value = 0.02), and even more significant when focusing on sites targeted by top 102 highly expressed miRNAs only (p value = 0.01). These results comply with previous findings and further suggest that combining miRNA expression and PAR-CLIP data can improve accuracy of the miRNA target prediction.CONCLUSION: To sum up, we devised a systematic approach for mining miRNA-target sites from CLIP-seq and PAR-CLIP sequencing data, and integrated the workflow with a graphical web-based browser, which provides a user friendly interface and detailed annotations of MTIs. We also showed through real-life examples that miRTarCLIP is a powerful tool for understanding miRNAs. Our integrated tool can be accessed online freely at http://miRTarCLIP.mbc.nctu.edu.tw.
24307554	5	2013	Genome Res	Endothelial, epithelial, and fibroblast cells exhibit specific splicing programs independently of their tissue of origin.	Alternative splicing is the main mechanism of increasing the proteome diversity coded by a limited number of genes. It is well established that different tissues or organs express different splicing variants. However, organs are composed of common major cell types, including fibroblasts, epithelial, and endothelial cells. By analyzing large-scale data sets generated by The ENCODE Project Consortium and after extensive RT-PCR validation, we demonstrate that each of the three major cell types expresses a specific splicing program independently of its organ origin. Furthermore, by analyzing splicing factor expression across samples, publicly available splicing factor binding site data sets (CLIP-seq), and exon array data sets after splicing factor depletion, we identified several splicing factors, including ESRP1 and 2, MBNL1, NOVA1, PTBP1, and RBFOX2, that contribute to establishing these cell type-specific splicing programs. All of the analyzed data sets are freely available in a user-friendly web interface named FasterDB, which describes all known splicing variants of human and mouse genes and their splicing patterns across several dozens of normal and cancer cells as well as across tissues. Information regarding splicing factors that potentially contribute to individual exon regulation is also provided via a dedicated CLIP-seq and exon array data visualization interface. To the best of our knowledge, FasterDB is the first database integrating such a variety of large-scale data sets to enable functional genomics analyses at exon-level resolution.
24217916	5	2013	Nucleic Acids Res	NPInter v2.0: an updated database of ncRNA interactions.	NPInter (http://www.bioinfo.org/NPInter) is a database that integrates experimentally verified functional interactions between noncoding RNAs (excluding tRNAs and rRNAs) and other biomolecules (proteins, RNAs and genomic DNAs). Extensive studies on ncRNA interactions have shown that ncRNAs could act as part of enzymatic or structural complexes, gene regulators or other functional elements. With the development of high-throughput biotechnology, such as cross-linking immunoprecipitation and high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq), the number of known ncRNA interactions, especially those formed by protein binding, has grown rapidly in recent years. In this work, we updated NPInter to version 2.0 by collecting ncRNA interactions from recent literature and related databases, expanding the number of entries to 201 107 covering 18 species. In addition, NPInter v2.0 incorporated a service for the BLAST alignment search as well as visualization of interactions.
24164894	4	2013	Mol Cell Biol	Transcriptome-wide RNA interaction profiling reveals physical and functional targets of hnRNP L in human T cells.	The RNA processing factor hnRNP L is required for T cell development and function. However, the spectrum of direct targets of hnRNP L activity in T cells has yet to be defined. In this study, we used cross-linking and immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq) to identify the RNA binding sites of hnRNP L within the transcriptomes of human CD4(+) and cultured Jurkat T cells. We find that hnRNP L binds preferentially to transcripts encoding proteins involved in RNA processing and in Wnt and T cell receptor (TCR) signaling. This binding is largely conserved across both quiescent and activated T cells, in agreement with the critical role of hnRNP L throughout T cell biology. Importantly, based on the binding profile of hnRNP L, we validate numerous instances of hnRNP L-dependent alternative splicing of genes critical to T cell function. We further show that alternative exons with weak 5' splice site sequences specifically show a strong correlation between hnRNP L binding and hnRNP L-dependent splicing regulation. Together, these data provide the first transcriptome-wide analysis of the RNA targets of hnRNP L in lymphoid cells and add to the functional understanding of hnRNP L in human biology.
24058384	3	2013	Stat Biosci	Statistical and Computational Methods for High-Throughput Sequencing Data Analysis of Alternative Splicing.	The burgeoning field of high-throughput sequencing significantly improves our ability to understand the complexity of transcriptomes. Alternative splicing, as one of the most important driving forces for transcriptome diversity, can now be studied at an unprecedent resolution. Efficient and powerful computational and statistical methods are in urgent need to facilitate the characterization and quantification of alternative splicing events. Here we discuss methods in splice junction read mapping, and methods in exon-centric or isoform-centric quantification of alternative splicing. In addition, we discuss HITS-CLIP and splicing QTL analyses which are novel high-throughput sequencing based approaches in the dissection of splicing regulation.
23939427	3	2013	Int J Mol Sci	Mechanisms of Lin28-mediated miRNA and mRNA regulation--a structural and functional perspective.	Lin28 is an essential RNA-binding protein that is ubiquitously expressed in embryonic stem cells. Its physiological function has been linked to the regulation of differentiation, development, and oncogenesis as well as glucose metabolism. Lin28 mediates these pleiotropic functions by inhibiting let-7 miRNA biogenesis and by modulating the translation of target mRNAs. Both activities strongly depend on Lin28's RNA-binding domains (RBDs), an N-terminal cold-shock domain (CSD) and a C-terminal Zn-knuckle domain (ZKD). Recent biochemical and structural studies revealed the mechanisms of how Lin28 controls let-7 biogenesis. Lin28 binds to the terminal loop of pri- and pre-let-7 miRNA and represses their processing by Drosha and Dicer. Several biochemical and structural studies showed that the specificity of this interaction is mainly mediated by the ZKD with a conserved GGAGA or GGAGA-like motif. Further RNA crosslinking and immunoprecipitation coupled to high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq) studies confirmed this binding motif and uncovered a large number of new mRNA binding sites. Here we review exciting recent progress in our understanding of how Lin28 binds structurally diverse RNAs and fulfills its pleiotropic functions.
23550653	3	2013	Immunol Rev	Exploring the RNA world in hematopoietic cells through the lens of RNA-binding proteins.	The discovery of microRNAs has renewed interest in posttranscriptional modes of regulation, fueling an emerging view of a rich RNA world within our cells that deserves further exploration. Much work has gone into elucidating genetic regulatory networks that orchestrate gene expression programs and direct cell fate decisions in the hematopoietic system. However, the focus has been to elucidate signaling pathways and transcriptional programs. To bring us one step closer to reverse engineering the molecular logic of cellular differentiation, it will be necessary to map posttranscriptional circuits as well and integrate them in the context of existing network models. In this regard, RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) may rival transcription factors as important regulators of cell fates and represent a tractable opportunity to connect the RNA world to the proteome. ChIP-seq has greatly facilitated genome-wide localization of DNA-binding proteins, helping us to understand genomic regulation at a systems level. Similarly, technological advances such as CLIP-seq allow transcriptome-wide mapping of RBP binding sites, aiding us to unravel posttranscriptional networks. Here, we review RBP-mediated posttranscriptional regulation, paying special attention to findings relevant to the immune system. As a prime example, we highlight the RBP Lin28B, which acts as a heterochronic switch between fetal and adult lymphopoiesis.
23343768	3	2013	Cell Cycle	Body temperature cycles: gatekeepers of circadian clocks.	
24178558	2	2013	Methods Mol Biol	HITS-CLIP (CLIP-Seq) for mouse Piwi proteins.	Piwi proteins, such as Aubergine in Drosophila and Miwi and Mili in mice, form a major subclade of the Argonaute family, which comprise a distinct class of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) able to bind small RNAs. Small RNAs can target complementary RNAs. Piwis are essential for the animal germline and bind Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) to form pi-RiboNucleoProteins (piRNPs). Although many piRNAs target retrotransposons for safeguarding genome integrity of the germ cell, whether piRNAs can target other mRNAs for regulatory purposes is still under investigation. Here we present the technical protocol for &quot;High Throughput Sequencing after in vivo Crosslinking and Immunoprecipitation&quot; (HITS-CLIP, CLIP-Seq), adapted for mouse Piwi proteins Mili and Miwi. We also provide general recommendations for the application of this protocol for different RBPs and also for the bioinformatic analysis of the deep sequencing data.
24038734	2	2013	Stem Cells	Genome-wide analysis of miRNA-mRNA interactions in marrow stromal cells.	Regulation of hematopoietic stem cell proliferation, lineage commitment, and differentiation in adult vertebrates requires extrinsic signals provided by cells in the marrow microenvironment (ME) located within the bone marrow. Both secreted and cell-surface bound factors critical to this regulation have been identified, yet control of their expression by cells within the ME has not been addressed. Herein we hypothesize that microRNAs (miRNAs) contribute to their controlled expression. MiRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that bind to target mRNAs and downregulate gene expression by either initiating mRNA degradation or preventing peptide translation. Testing the role of miRNAs in downregulating gene expression has been difficult since conventional techniques used to define miRNA-mRNA interactions are indirect and have high false-positive and negative rates. In this report, a genome-wide biochemical technique (high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by cross-linking immunoprecipitation or HITS-CLIP) was used to generate unbiased genome-wide maps of miRNA-mRNA interactions in two critical cellular components of the marrow ME: marrow stromal cells and bone marrow endothelial cells. Analysis of these datasets identified miRNAs as direct regulators of JAG1, WNT5A, MMP2, and VEGFA; four factors that are important to ME function. Our results show the feasibility and utility of unbiased genome-wide biochemical techniques in dissecting the role of miRNAs in regulation of complex tissues such as the marrow ME.
23827811	2	2013	Genomics	Transcriptome-wide analysis of TDP-43 binding small RNAs identifies miR-NID1 (miR-8485), a novel miRNA that represses NRXN1 expression.	The Tar DNA-binding protein 43 (TARDBP, TDP-43) regulates RNA processing and miRNA biogenesis and is known to be involved in neurodegeneration. Messenger RNA (mRNA) targets of TDP-43 have recently been systematically identified, but small RNAs (sRNAs) bound by TDP-43 have not been studied in details. Here, we reexamine cross-linking, immunoprecipitation and sequencing (CLIP-seq) data, and identify pre-miRNAs, miRNAs and piRNAs bound by TDP-43 in human and mouse brains. Subsequent analysis of TDP-43 binding miRNAs suggests that target genes are enriched in functions involving synaptic activities. We further identify a novel miRNA (miR-NID1) processed from the intron 5 of human neurexin 1, NRXN1, and show that miR-NID1 represses NRXN1 expression by binding to TDP-43. Our results are in accordance with previously published data indicating TDP-43 through binding of specific miRNAs to play roles in neurodevelopmental activities and neurological disorders and further our understanding of TDP-43 function.
23817991	2	2013	J Comp Neurol	IB4-binding sensory neurons in the adult rat express a novel 3' UTR-extended isoform of CaMK4 that is associated with its localization to axons.	Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 4 (gene and transcript: CaMK4; protein: CaMKIV) is the nuclear effector of the Ca(2+) /calmodulin kinase (CaMK) pathway where it coordinates transcriptional responses. However, CaMKIV is present in the cytoplasm and axons of subpopulations of neurons, including some sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglia (DRG), suggesting an extranuclear role for this protein. We observed that CaMKIV was expressed strongly in the cytoplasm and axons of a subpopulation of small-diameter DRG neurons, most likely cutaneous nociceptors by virtue of their binding the isolectin IB4. In IB4+ spinal nerve axons, 20% of CaMKIV was colocalized with the endocytic marker Rab7 in axons that highly expressed CAM-kinase-kinase (CAMKK), an upstream activator of CaMKIV, suggesting a role for CaMKIV in signaling though signaling endosomes. Using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with riboprobes, we also observed that small-diameter neurons expressed high levels of a novel 3' untranslated region (UTR) variant of CaMK4 mRNA. Using rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE), reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with gene-specific primers, and cDNA sequencing analyses we determined that the novel transcript contains an additional 10 kb beyond the annotated gene terminus to a highly conserved alternate polyadenylation site. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) analyses of fluorescent-activated cell sorted (FACS) DRG neurons confirmed that this 3'-UTR-extended variant was preferentially expressed in IB4-binding neurons. Computational analyses of the 3'-UTR sequence predict that UTR-extension introduces consensus sites for RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) including the embryonic lethal abnormal vision (ELAV)/Hu family proteins. We consider the possible implications of axonal CaMKIV in the context of the unique properties of IB4-binding DRG neurons.
23709495	2	2013	Bioinformatics	miRTCat: a comprehensive map of human and mouse microRNA target sites including non-canonical nucleation bulges.	SUMMARY: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate various biological functions by binding hundreds of transcripts to impart post-transcriptional repression. Recently, by applying a transcriptome-wide experimental method for identifying miRNA target sites (Ago HITS-CLIP), a novel non-canonical target site, named 'nucleation bulge', was discovered as widespread, functional and evolutionally conserved. Although such non-canonical nucleation bulges have been proven to be predictive by using 'pivot pairing rule' and sequence conservation, this approach has not been applied yet. To facilitate the functional studies of non-canonical miRNA targets, we implement miRTCat: a comprehensive searchable map of miRNA target sites, including non-canonical nucleation bulges, not only mapped in experimentally verified miRNA-bound regions but also predicted in all 3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTRs) derived from human and mouse (∼15.6% as expected false-positive results).AVAILABILITY: http://ion.skku.edu/mirtcat.CONTACT: swchi@skku.eduSUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
23696004	2	2013	RNA Biol	The human transcriptome is enriched for miRNA-binding sites located in cooperativity-permitting distance.	MiRNAs are short, non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally through specific binding to mRNA. Deregulation of miRNAs is associated with various diseases and interference with miRNA function has proven therapeutic potential. Most mRNAs are thought to be regulated by multiple miRNAs and there is some evidence that such joint activity is enhanced if a short distance between sites allows for cooperative binding. Until now, however, the concept of cooperativity among miRNAs has not been addressed in a transcriptome-wide approach. Here, we computationally screened human mRNAs for distances between miRNA binding sites that are expected to promote cooperativity. We find that sites with a maximal spacing of 26 nucleotides are enriched for naturally occurring miRNAs compared with control sequences. Furthermore, miRNAs with similar characteristics as indicated by either co-expression within a specific tissue or co-regulation in a disease context are predicted to target a higher number of mRNAs cooperatively than unrelated miRNAs. These bioinformatic data were compared with genome-wide sets of biochemically validated miRNA targets derived by Argonaute crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP and PAR-CLIP). To ease further research into combined and cooperative miRNA function, we developed miRco, a database connecting miRNAs and respective targets involved in distance-defined cooperative regulation (mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/mirco). In conclusion, our findings suggest that cooperativity of miRNA-target interaction is a widespread phenomenon that may play an important role in miRNA-mediated gene regulation.
23545196	2	2013	Methods	Transcriptome-wide identification of RNA binding sites by CLIP-seq.	An emergent strategy for the transcriptome-wide study of protein-RNA interactions is CLIP-seq (crosslinking and immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing). We combined CLIP-seq and mRNA-seq to identify direct RNA binding sites of eIF4AIII in human cells. This RNA helicase is a core constituant of the Exon Junction Complex (EJC), a multifunctional protein complex associated with spliced mRNAs in metazoans. Here, we describe the successive steps of the CLIP protocol and the computational tools and strategies we employed to map the physiological targets of eIF4AIII on human RNAs.
23597756	1	2013	Methods	An update on recent methods applied for deciphering the diversity of the noncoding RNA genome structure and function.	The explosion of high throughput sequencing technologies marked a turn in our way of understanding the complexity and diversity of the transcriptome, including noncoding transcription dependent on RNA polymerase II. Many new ncRNA populations were described in recent years, including for example TSS RNAs, lincRNAs, eRNAs, PROMPTS and several others. Besides the advances in the average depth coverage of RNA-seq experiments, various additional protocols are now available that can be used to address qualitative and quantitative aspects of the noncoding transcriptome complexity and function. In this review, we will focus on methods allowing isolation and characterization of complex RNA populations using sequencing based approaches, including conventional strategies already used for coding genome and more specific developments allowing, for example, the study of nascent strand transcription, protein-bound or structured RNAs.
23500590	1	2013	Mol Cell Neurosci	TDP-43 high throughput screening analyses in neurodegeneration: advantages and pitfalls.	Dysfunctions in RNA processing and in particular the aberrant regulation of RNA binding proteins (RBPs) have recently been shown to play a fundamental role in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms involved will require the elucidation of the role(s) played by these RBPs in the general cell metabolism and neuronal survival in particular. In the past, the preferred approach has been to determine first of all the functional properties of the factor(s) of interest and then use this knowledge to determine targets in biologically relevant events. More recently, novel experimental approaches such as microarrays, RNA-seq and CLIP-seq have also become very popular to study RBPs. The advantage of these approaches, collectively known as high throughput screening (HTS), is their ability to determine gene expression changes or RNA/protein targets at a global cellular level. In theory, HTS strategies should be ideal for uncovering novel functional roles/targets of any RBP inside the cell. In practice, however, there are still difficulties in getting a coherent picture from all the huge amount of data they generate, frequently not validated experimentally and thus of unknown value. They may even act unfavorably towards a specific increase of knowledge of RBP functions, as the incomplete results are taken as solid data. In this work we will illustrate as an example the use of the HTS methodologies to characterize the interactions of a specific RBP: TDP-43. The multiple functions of this protein in RNA processing and its involvement in the pathogenesis of several forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal lobar degeneration and other neurodegenerative diseases make it an excellent substrate for our analysis of the various advantages and limitations of different HTS experimental approaches.
23377977	0	2013	Adv Exp Med Biol	Discovery of microRNA regulatory networks by integrating multidimensional high-throughput data.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) of approximately 22 nt that regulate the expression of a large fraction of genes by targeting messenger RNAs (mRNAs). However, determining the biologically significant targets of miRNAs is an ongoing challenge. In this chapter, we describe how to identify miRNA-target interactions and miRNA regulatory networks from high-throughput deep sequencing, CLIP-Seq (HITS-CLIP, PAR-CLIP) and degradome sequencing data using starBase platforms. In starBase, several web-based and stand-alone computational tools were developed to discover Argonaute (Ago) binding and cleavage sites, miRNA-target interactions, perform enrichment analysis of miRNA target genes in Gene Ontology (GO) categories and biological pathways, and identify combinatorial effects between Ago and other RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Investigating target pathways of miRNAs in human CLIP-Seq data, we found that many cancer-associated miRNAs modulate cancer pathways. Performing an enrichment analysis of genes targeted by highly expressed miRNAs in the mouse brain showed that many miRNAs are involved in cancer-associated MAPK signaling and glioma pathways, as well as neuron-associated neurotrophin signaling and axon guidance pathways. Moreover, thousands of combinatorial binding sites between Ago and RBPs were identified from CLIP-Seq data suggesting RBPs and miRNAs coordinately regulate mRNA transcripts. As a means of comprehensively integrating CLIP-Seq and Degradome-Seq data, the starBase platform is expected to identify clinically relevant miRNA-target regulatory relationships, and reveal multi-dimensional post-transcriptional regulatory networks involving miRNAs and RBPs. starBase is available at http://starbase.sysu.edu.cn/ .
23358458	0	2013	Elife	NA	By regulating the inclusion of 'cryptic' exons in messenger RNA in nerve cells, NOVA proteins are able to influence the abundance of the corresponding proteins.
22901804	83	2012	Cell	Transcriptome-wide regulation of pre-mRNA splicing and mRNA localization by muscleblind proteins.	The muscleblind-like (Mbnl) family of RNA-binding proteins plays important roles in muscle and eye development and in myotonic dystrophy (DM), in which expanded CUG or CCUG repeats functionally deplete Mbnl proteins. We identified transcriptome-wide functional and biophysical targets of Mbnl proteins in brain, heart, muscle, and myoblasts by using RNA-seq and CLIP-seq approaches. This analysis identified several hundred splicing events whose regulation depended on Mbnl function in a pattern indicating functional interchangeability between Mbnl1 and Mbnl2. A nucleotide resolution RNA map associated repression or activation of exon splicing with Mbnl binding near either 3' splice site or near the downstream 5' splice site, respectively. Transcriptomic analysis of subcellular compartments uncovered a global role for Mbnls in regulating localization of mRNAs in both mouse and Drosophila cells, and Mbnl-dependent translation and protein secretion were observed for a subset of mRNAs with Mbnl-dependent localization. These findings hold several new implications for DM pathogenesis.
22343717	76	2012	Nat Struct Mol Biol	An alternative mode of microRNA target recognition.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate mRNA targets through perfect pairing with their seed region (positions 2-7). Recently, a precise genome-wide map of miRNA interaction sites in mouse brain was generated by high-throughput sequencing and analysis of clusters of ~50-nucleotide mRNA tags cross-linked to Argonaute (Ago HITS-CLIP). By analyzing Ago HITS-CLIP 'orphan clusters'-Ago binding regions from HITS-CLIP that cannot be explained by canonical seed matches-we have now identified an alternative binding mode used by miRNAs. Specifically, G-bulge sites (positions 5-6) are often bound and regulated by miR-124 in brain. More generally, bulged sites comprise ≥15% of all Ago-miRNA interactions in mouse brain and are evolutionarily conserved. We call position 6 the 'pivot' nucleotide and suggest a model in which a transitional 'nucleation bulge' leads to functional bulge mRNA-miRNA interactions, expanding the number of potential miRNA regulatory sites.
22574288	75	2012	Cell Rep	Integrative genome-wide analysis reveals cooperative regulation of alternative splicing by hnRNP proteins.	Understanding how RNA binding proteins control the splicing code is fundamental to human biology and disease. Here, we present a comprehensive study to elucidate how heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoparticle (hnRNP) proteins, among the most abundant RNA binding proteins, coordinate to regulate alternative pre-mRNA splicing (AS) in human cells. Using splicing-sensitive microarrays, crosslinking and immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq), and cDNA sequencing, we find that more than half of all AS events are regulated by multiple hnRNP proteins and that some combinations of hnRNP proteins exhibit significant synergy, whereas others act antagonistically. Our analyses reveal position-dependent RNA splicing maps, in vivo consensus binding sites, a surprising level of cross- and autoregulation among hnRNP proteins, and the coordinated regulation by hnRNP proteins of dozens of other RNA binding proteins and genes associated with cancer. Our findings define an unprecedented degree of complexity and compensatory relationships among hnRNP proteins and their splicing targets that likely confer robustness to cells.
22473208	58	2012	EMBO J	EBV and human microRNAs co-target oncogenic and apoptotic viral and human genes during latency.	Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) controls gene expression to transform human B cells and maintain viral latency. High-throughput sequencing and crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) identified mRNA targets of 44 EBV and 310 human microRNAs (miRNAs) in Jijoye (Latency III) EBV-transformed B cells. While 25% of total cellular miRNAs are viral, only three viral mRNAs, all latent transcripts, are targeted. Thus, miRNAs do not control the latent/lytic switch by targeting EBV lytic genes. Unexpectedly, 90% of the 1664 human 3'-untranslated regions targeted by the 12 most abundant EBV miRNAs are also targeted by human miRNAs via distinct binding sites. Half of these are targets of the oncogenic miR-17∼92 miRNA cluster and associated families, including mRNAs that regulate transcription, apoptosis, Wnt signalling, and the cell cycle. Reporter assays confirmed the functionality of several EBV and miR-17 family miRNA-binding sites in EBV latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1), EBV BHRF1, and host CAPRIN2 mRNAs. Our extensive list of EBV and human miRNA targets implicates miRNAs in the control of EBV latency and illuminates viral miRNA function in general.
22796965	49	2012	Nat Struct Mol Biol	DGCR8 HITS-CLIP reveals novel functions for the Microprocessor.	The Drosha-DGCR8 complex (Microprocessor) is required for microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis. DGCR8 recognizes the RNA substrate, whereas Drosha functions as the endonuclease. Using high-throughput sequencing and cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) we identified RNA targets of DGCR8 in human cells. Unexpectedly, miRNAs were not the most abundant targets. DGCR8-bound RNAs also comprised several hundred mRNAs as well as small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) and long noncoding RNAs. We found that the Microprocessor controlled the abundance of several mRNAs as well as of MALAT1. By contrast, DGCR8-mediated cleavage of snoRNAs was independent of Drosha, suggesting the involvement of DGCR8 in cellular complexes with other endonucleases. Binding of DGCR8 to cassette exons is a new mechanism for regulation of the relative abundance of alternatively spliced isoforms. These data provide insights in the complex role of DGCR8 in controlling the fate of several classes of RNAs.
22884328	48	2012	Neuron	Muscleblind-like 2-mediated alternative splicing in the developing brain and dysregulation in myotonic dystrophy.	The RNA-mediated disease model for myotonic dystrophy (DM) proposes that microsatellite C(C)TG expansions express toxic RNAs that disrupt splicing regulation by altering MBNL1 and CELF1 activities. While this model explains DM manifestations in muscle, less is known about the effects of C(C)UG expression on the brain. Here, we report that Mbnl2 knockout mice develop several DM-associated central nervous system (CNS) features including abnormal REM sleep propensity and deficits in spatial memory. Mbnl2 is prominently expressed in the hippocampus and Mbnl2 knockouts show a decrease in NMDA receptor (NMDAR) synaptic transmission and impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity. While Mbnl2 loss did not significantly alter target transcript levels in the hippocampus, misregulated splicing of hundreds of exons was detected using splicing microarrays, RNA-seq, and HITS-CLIP. Importantly, the majority of the Mbnl2-regulated exons examined were similarly misregulated in DM. We propose that major pathological features of the DM brain result from disruption of the MBNL2-mediated developmental splicing program.
22959275	44	2012	Mol Cell	LIN28 binds messenger RNAs at GGAGA motifs and regulates splicing factor abundance.	LIN28 is a conserved RNA-binding protein implicated in pluripotency, reprogramming, and oncogenesis. It was previously shown to act primarily by blocking let-7 microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis, but here we elucidate distinct roles of LIN28 regulation via its direct messenger RNA (mRNA) targets. Through crosslinking and immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq) in human embryonic stem cells and somatic cells expressing exogenous LIN28, we have defined discrete LIN28-binding sites in a quarter of human transcripts. These sites revealed that LIN28 binds to GGAGA sequences enriched within loop structures in mRNAs, reminiscent of its interaction with let-7 miRNA precursors. Among LIN28 mRNA targets, we found evidence for LIN28 autoregulation and also direct but differing effects on the protein abundance of splicing regulators in somatic and pluripotent stem cells. Splicing-sensitive microarrays demonstrated that exogenous LIN28 expression causes widespread downstream alternative splicing changes. These findings identify important regulatory functions of LIN28 via direct mRNA interactions.
23102813	38	2012	Cell	LIN28A is a suppressor of ER-associated translation in embryonic stem cells.	LIN28 plays a critical role in developmental transition, glucose metabolism, and tumorigenesis. At the molecular level, LIN28 is known to repress maturation of let-7 microRNAs and enhance translation of certain mRNAs. In this study, we obtain a genome-wide view of the molecular function of LIN28A in mouse embryonic stem cells by carrying out RNA crosslinking-immunoprecipitation-sequencing (CLIP-seq) and ribosome footprinting. We find that, in addition to let-7 precursors, LIN28A binds to a large number of spliced mRNAs. LIN28A recognizes AAGNNG, AAGNG, and less frequently UGUG, which are located in the terminal loop of a small hairpin. LIN28A is localized to the periendoplasmic reticulum (ER) area and inhibits translation of mRNAs that are destined for the ER, reducing the synthesis of transmembrane proteins, ER or Golgi lumen proteins, and secretory proteins. Our study suggests a selective regulatory mechanism for ER-associated translation and reveals an unexpected role of LIN28A as a global suppressor of genes in the secretory pathway.
22802532	37	2012	Genes Dev	Ptbp2 represses adult-specific splicing to regulate the generation of neuronal precursors in the embryonic brain.	Two polypyrimidine tract RNA-binding proteins (PTBs), one near-ubiquitously expressed (Ptbp1) and another highly tissue-restricted (Ptbp2), regulate RNA in interrelated but incompletely understood ways. Ptbp1, a splicing regulator, is replaced in the brain and differentiated neuronal cell lines by Ptbp2. To define the roles of Ptbp2 in the nervous system, we generated two independent Ptbp2-null strains, unexpectedly revealing that Ptbp2 is expressed in neuronal progenitors and is essential for postnatal survival. A HITS-CLIP (high-throughput sequencing cross-linking immunoprecipitation)-generated map of reproducible Ptbp2-RNA interactions in the developing mouse neocortex, combined with results from splicing-sensitive microarrays, demonstrated that the major action of Ptbp2 is to inhibit adult-specific alternative exons by binding pyrimidine-rich sequences upstream of and/or within them. These regulated exons are present in mRNAs encoding proteins associated with control of cell fate, proliferation, and the actin cytoskeleton, suggesting a role for Ptbp2 in neurogenesis. Indeed, neuronal progenitors in the Ptbp2-null brain exhibited an aberrant polarity and were associated with regions of premature neurogenesis and reduced progenitor pools. Thus, Ptbp2 inhibition of a discrete set of adult neuronal exons underlies early brain development prior to neuronal differentiation and is essential for postnatal survival.
22927820	36	2012	PLoS Pathog	Ago HITS-CLIP expands understanding of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus miRNA function in primary effusion lymphomas.	KSHV is the etiological agent of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), and a subset of multicentricCastleman's disease (MCD). The fact that KSHV-encoded miRNAs are readily detectable in all KSHV-associated tumors suggests a potential role in viral pathogenesis and tumorigenesis. MiRNA-mediated regulation of gene expression is a complex network with each miRNA having many potential targets, and to date only few KSHV miRNA targets have been experimentally determined. A detailed understanding of KSHV miRNA functions requires high-through putribonomics to globally analyze putative miRNA targets in a cell type-specific manner. We performed Ago HITS-CLIP to identify viral and cellular miRNAs and their cognate targets in two latently KSHV-infected PEL cell lines. Ago HITS-CLIP recovered 1170 and 950 cellular KSHV miRNA targets from BCBL-1 and BC-3, respectively. Importantly, enriched clusters contained KSHV miRNA seed matches in the 3'UTRs of numerous well characterized targets, among them THBS1, BACH1, and C/EBPβ. KSHV miRNA targets were strongly enriched for genes involved in multiple pathways central for KSHV biology, such as apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, lymphocyte proliferation, and immune evasion, thus further supporting a role in KSHV pathogenesis and potentially tumorigenesis. A limited number of viral transcripts were also enriched by HITS-CLIP including vIL-6 expressed only in a subset of PEL cells during latency. Interestingly, Ago HITS-CLIP revealed extremely high levels of Ago-associated KSHV miRNAs especially in BC-3 cells where more than 70% of all miRNAs are of viral origin. This suggests that in addition to seed match-specific targeting of cellular genes, KSHV miRNAs may also function by hijacking RISCs, thereby contributing to a global de-repression of cellular gene expression due to the loss of regulation by human miRNAs. In summary, we provide an extensive list of cellular and viral miRNA targets representing an important resource to decipher KSHV miRNA function.
22842725	36	2012	Nat Struct Mol Biol	Mili and Miwi target RNA repertoire reveals piRNA biogenesis and function of Miwi in spermiogenesis.	Germ cells implement elaborate mechanisms to protect their genetic material and to regulate gene expression during differentiation. Piwi proteins bind Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), small germline RNAs whose biogenesis and functions are still largely elusive. We used high-throughput sequencing after cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) coupled with RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) to characterize the genome-wide target RNA repertoire of Mili (Piwil2) and Miwi (Piwil1), two Piwi proteins expressed in mouse postnatal testis. We report the in vivo pathway of primary piRNA biogenesis and implicate distinct nucleolytic activities that process Piwi-bound precursor transcripts. Our studies indicate that pachytene piRNAs are the end products of RNA processing. HITS-CLIP demonstrated that Miwi binds spermiogenic mRNAs directly, without using piRNAs as guides, and independent biochemical analyses of testis mRNA ribonucleoproteins (mRNPs) established that Miwi functions in the formation of mRNP complexes that stabilize mRNAs essential for spermiogenesis.
22829983	34	2012	Sci Rep	Position-dependent FUS-RNA interactions regulate alternative splicing events and transcriptions.	FUS is an RNA-binding protein that regulates transcription, alternative splicing, and mRNA transport. Aberrations of FUS are causally associated with familial and sporadic ALS/FTLD. We analyzed FUS-mediated transcriptions and alternative splicing events in mouse primary cortical neurons using exon arrays. We also characterized FUS-binding RNA sites in the mouse cerebrum with HITS-CLIP. We found that FUS-binding sites tend to form stable secondary structures. Analysis of position-dependence of FUS-binding sites disclosed scattered binding of FUS to and around the alternatively spliced exons including those associated with neurodegeneration such as Mapt, Camk2a, and Fmr1. We also found that FUS is often bound to the antisense RNA strand at the promoter regions. Global analysis of these FUS-tags and the expression profiles disclosed that binding of FUS to the promoter antisense strand downregulates transcriptions of the coding strand. Our analysis revealed that FUS regulates alternative splicing events and transcriptions in a position-dependent manner.
22998874	24	2012	Neuron	Neuronal Elav-like (Hu) proteins regulate RNA splicing and abundance to control glutamate levels and neuronal excitability.	The paraneoplastic neurologic disorders target several families of neuron-specific RNA binding proteins (RNABPs), revealing that there are unique aspects of gene expression regulation in the mammalian brain. Here, we used HITS-CLIP to determine robust binding sites targeted by the neuronal Elav-like (nElavl) RNABPs. Surprisingly, nElav protein binds preferentially to GU-rich sequences in vivo and in vitro, with secondary binding to AU-rich sequences. nElavl null mice were used to validate the consequence of these binding events in the brain, demonstrating that they bind intronic sequences in a position dependent manner to regulate alternative splicing and to 3'UTR sequences to regulate mRNA levels. These controls converge on the glutamate synthesis pathway in neurons; nElavl proteins are required to maintain neurotransmitter glutamate levels, and the lack of nElavl leads to spontaneous epileptic seizure activity. The genome-wide analysis of nElavl targets reveals that one function of neuron-specific RNABPs is to control excitation-inhibition balance in the brain.
23085716	23	2012	Nat Struct Mol Biol	CLIP-seq of eIF4AIII reveals transcriptome-wide mapping of the human exon junction complex.	The exon junction complex (EJC) is a central effector of the fate of mRNAs, linking nuclear processing to mRNA transport, translation and surveillance. However, little is known about its transcriptome-wide targets. We used cross-linking and immunoprecipitation methods coupled to high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq) in human cells to identify the binding sites of the DEAD-box helicase eIF4AIII, an EJC core component. CLIP reads form peaks that are located mainly in spliced mRNAs. Most expressed exons harbor peaks either in the canonical EJC region, located ~24 nucleotides upstream of exonic junctions, or in other noncanonical regions. Notably, both of these types of peaks are preferentially associated with unstructured and purine-rich sequences containing the motif GAAGA, which is a potential binding site for EJC-associated factors. Therefore, EJC positions vary spatially and quantitatively between exons. This transcriptome-wide mapping of human eIF4AIII reveals unanticipated aspects of the EJC and broadens its potential impact on post-transcriptional regulation.
23193281	21	2012	Nucleic Acids Res	DIANA-LncBase: experimentally verified and computationally predicted microRNA targets on long non-coding RNAs.	Recently, the attention of the research community has been focused on long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and their physiological/pathological implications. As the number of experiments increase in a rapid rate and transcriptional units are better annotated, databases indexing lncRNA properties and function gradually become essential tools to this process. Aim of DIANA-LncBase (www.microrna.gr/LncBase) is to reinforce researchers' attempts and unravel microRNA (miRNA)-lncRNA putative functional interactions. This study provides, for the first time, a comprehensive annotation of miRNA targets on lncRNAs. DIANA-LncBase hosts transcriptome-wide experimentally verified and computationally predicted miRNA recognition elements (MREs) on human and mouse lncRNAs. The analysis performed includes an integration of most of the available lncRNA resources, relevant high-throughput HITS-CLIP and PAR-CLIP experimental data as well as state-of-the-art in silico target predictions. The experimentally supported entries available in DIANA-LncBase correspond to &gt;5000 interactions, while the computationally predicted interactions exceed 10 million. DIANA-LncBase hosts detailed information for each miRNA-lncRNA pair, such as external links, graphic plots of transcripts' genomic location, representation of the binding sites, lncRNA tissue expression as well as MREs conservation and prediction scores.
22325991	17	2012	Mol Cell	Nuclear matrix factor hnRNP U/SAF-A exerts a global control of alternative splicing by regulating U2 snRNP maturation.	The nuclear matrix-associated hnRNP U/SAF-A protein has been implicated in diverse pathways from transcriptional regulation to telomere length control to X inactivation, but the precise mechanism underlying each of these processes has remained elusive. Here, we report hnRNP U as a regulator of SMN2 splicing from a custom RNAi screen. Genome-wide analysis by CLIP-seq reveals that hnRNP U binds virtually to all classes of regulatory noncoding RNAs, including all snRNAs required for splicing of both major and minor classes of introns, leading to the discovery that hnRNP U regulates U2 snRNP maturation and Cajal body morphology in the nucleus. Global analysis of hnRNP U-dependent splicing by RNA-seq coupled with bioinformatic analysis of associated splicing signals suggests a general rule for splice site selection through modulating the core splicing machinery. These findings exemplify hnRNP U/SAF-A as a potent regulator of nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles in diverse gene expression pathways.
22888400	9	2012	Sci Rep	Molecular dynamics simulations of Ago silencing complexes reveal a large repertoire of admissible 'seed-less' targets.	To better understand the recognition mechanism of RISC and the repertoire of guide-target interactions we introduced G:U wobbles and mismatches at various positions of the microRNA (miRNA) 'seed' region and performed all-atom molecular dynamics simulations of the resulting Ago-miRNA:mRNA ternary complexes. Our simulations reveal that many modifications, including combinations of multiple G:U wobbles and mismatches in the seed region, are admissible and result in only minor structural fluctuations that do not affect overall complex stability. These results are further supported by analyses of HITS-CLIP data. Lastly, introduction of disruptive mutations revealed a bending motion of the PAZ domain along the L1/L2 'hinge' and a subsequent opening of the nucleic-acid-binding channel. Our findings suggest that the spectrum of a miRNA's admissible targets is different from what is currently anticipated by the canonical seed-model. Moreover, they provide a likely explanation for the previously reported sequence-dependent regulation of unintended targeting by siRNAs.
22966087	8	2012	RNA	The essential polysome-associated RNA-binding protein RBP42 targets mRNAs involved in Trypanosoma brucei energy metabolism.	RNA-binding proteins that target mRNA coding regions are emerging as regulators of post-transcriptional processes in eukaryotes. Here we describe a newly identified RNA-binding protein, RBP42, which targets the coding region of mRNAs in the insect form of the African trypanosome, Trypanosoma brucei. RBP42 is an essential protein and associates with polysome-bound mRNAs in the cytoplasm. A global survey of RBP42-bound mRNAs was performed by applying HITS-CLIP technology, which captures protein-RNA interactions in vivo using UV light. Specific RBP42-mRNA interactions, as well as mRNA interactions with a known RNA-binding protein, were purified using specific antibodies. Target RNA sequences were identified and quantified using high-throughput RNA sequencing. Analysis revealed that RBP42 bound mainly within the coding region of mRNAs that encode proteins involved in cellular energy metabolism. Although the mechanism of RBP42's function is unclear at present, we speculate that RBP42 plays a critical role in modulating T. brucei energy metabolism.
22369183	8	2012	BMC Genomics	Predicting sequence and structural specificities of RNA binding regions recognized by splicing factor SRSF1.	BACKGROUND: RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play diverse roles in eukaryotic RNA processing. Despite their pervasive functions in coding and noncoding RNA biogenesis and regulation, elucidating the sequence specificities that define protein-RNA interactions remains a major challenge. Recently, CLIP-seq (Cross-linking immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing) has been successfully implemented to study the transcriptome-wide binding patterns of SRSF1, PTBP1, NOVA and fox2 proteins. These studies either adopted traditional methods like Multiple EM for Motif Elicitation (MEME) to discover the sequence consensus of RBP's binding sites or used Z-score statistics to search for the overrepresented nucleotides of a certain size. We argue that most of these methods are not well-suited for RNA motif identification, as they are unable to incorporate the RNA structural context of protein-RNA interactions, which may affect to binding specificity. Here, we describe a novel model-based approach--RNAMotifModeler to identify the consensus of protein-RNA binding regions by integrating sequence features and RNA secondary structures.RESULTS: As an example, we implemented RNAMotifModeler on SRSF1 (SF2/ASF) CLIP-seq data. The sequence-structural consensus we identified is a purine-rich octamer 'AGAAGAAG' in a highly single-stranded RNA context. The unpaired probabilities, the probabilities of not forming pairs, are significantly higher than negative controls and the flanking sequence surrounding the binding site, indicating that SRSF1 proteins tend to bind on single-stranded RNA. Further statistical evaluations revealed that the second and fifth bases of SRSF1octamer motif have much stronger sequence specificities, but weaker single-strandedness, while the third, fourth, sixth and seventh bases are far more likely to be single-stranded, but have more degenerate sequence specificities. Therefore, we hypothesize that nucleotide specificity and secondary structure play complementary roles during binding site recognition by SRSF1.CONCLUSION: In this study, we presented a computational model to predict the sequence consensus and optimal RNA secondary structure for protein-RNA binding regions. The successful implementation on SRSF1 CLIP-seq data demonstrates great potential to improve our understanding on the binding specificity of RNA binding proteins.
22915600	6	2012	RNA	Analysis of the accessibility of CLIP bound sites reveals that nucleation of the miRNA:mRNA pairing occurs preferentially at the 3'-end of the seed match.	To find out whether the AGO-miRNA complex is more sensitive to the accessibility of a particular region inside the seed match, we analyze in detail the accessibility of a wide set of miRNA binding sites validated by PAR-CLIP and HITS-CLIP experiments. Our analysis reveals that nucleotides at the 3'-end of bound seed matches are significantly more accessible than nucleotides at the 5'-end as well as nucleotides at any positions in the unbound seed matches. We show that the accessibility of a single nucleotide at the 3'-end is more effective than the accessibility of several nucleotides at the 5'-end in discriminating between functional and nonfunctional binding sites. Analysis of mRNA and protein fold changes induced by miRNA overexpression demonstrates that genes with accessible nucleation regions at the 3'-end are down-regulated more strongly than genes whose accessible nucleation regions are located elsewhere within the seed match. We also observed an increase in the precision of the miRNA target prediction algorithm PACMIT when accessibility toward the 3'-end of the seed match was required. The pronounced sensitivity of the AGO-miRNA complex to the accessibility of the 3'-end of the seed match suggests that, in most cases, nucleation occurs in this region. We show that this conclusion is consistent with previous experimental studies.
23104891	3	2012	Bioinformatics	RIP-chip enrichment analysis.	MOTIVATION: RIP-chip is a high-throughput method to identify mRNAs that are targeted by RNA-binding proteins. The protein of interest is immunoprecipitated, and the identity and relative amount of mRNA associated with it is measured on microarrays. Even if a variety of methods is available to analyse microarray data, e.g. to detect differentially regulated genes, the additional experimental steps in RIP-chip require specialized methods. Here, we focus on two aspects of RIP-chip data: First, the efficiency of the immunoprecipitation step performed in the RIP-chip protocol varies in between different experiments introducing bias not existing in standard microarray experiments. This requires an additional normalization step to compare different samples and even technical replicates. Second, in contrast to standard differential gene expression experiments, the distribution of measurements is not normal. We exploit this fact to define a set of biologically relevant genes in a statistically meaningful way.RESULTS: Here, we propose two methods to analyse RIP-chip data: We model the measurement distribution as a gaussian mixture distribution, which allows us to compute false discovery rates (FDRs) for any cut-off. Thus, cut-offs can be chosen for any desired FDR. Furthermore, we use principal component analysis to determine the normalization factors necessary to remove immunoprecipitation bias. Both methods are evaluated on a large RIP-chip dataset measuring targets of Ago2, the major component of the microRNA guided RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). Using published HITS-CLIP experiments performed with the same cell line as used for RIP-chip, we show that the mixture modelling approach is a necessary step to remove background, which computed FDRs are valid, and that the additional normalization is a necessary step to make experiments comparable.AVAILABILITY: An R implementation of REA is available on the project website (http://www.bio.ifi.lmu.de/REA) and as supplementary data file.
21784246	259	2011	Cell	FMRP stalls ribosomal translocation on mRNAs linked to synaptic function and autism.	FMRP loss of function causes Fragile X syndrome (FXS) and autistic features. FMRP is a polyribosome-associated neuronal RNA-binding protein, suggesting that it plays a key role in regulating neuronal translation, but there has been little consensus regarding either its RNA targets or mechanism of action. Here, we use high-throughput sequencing of RNAs isolated by crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) to identify FMRP interactions with mouse brain polyribosomal mRNAs. FMRP interacts with the coding region of transcripts encoding pre- and postsynaptic proteins and transcripts implicated in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We developed a brain polyribosome-programmed translation system, revealing that FMRP reversibly stalls ribosomes specifically on its target mRNAs. Our results suggest that loss of a translational brake on the synthesis of a subset of synaptic proteins contributes to FXS. In addition, they provide insight into the molecular basis of the cognitive and allied defects in FXS and ASD and suggest multiple targets for clinical intervention.
21633356	87	2011	Nat Biotechnol	Mapping in vivo protein-RNA interactions at single-nucleotide resolution from HITS-CLIP data.	Mammalian RNA complexity is regulated through interactions of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) with their target transcripts. High-throughput sequencing together with UV-crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) is able to globally map RBP-binding footprint regions at a resolution of ~30-60 nucleotides. Here we describe a systematic way to analyze HITS-CLIP data to identify exact crosslink sites, and thereby determine protein-RNA interactions at single-nucleotide resolution. We found that reverse transcriptase used in CLIP frequently skips the crosslinked amino-acid-RNA adduct, resulting in a nucleotide deletion. Genome-wide analysis of these crosslinking-induced mutation sites (CIMS) in HITS-CLIP data for Nova and Argonaute (Ago) proteins in mouse brain tissue revealed deletions in ~8-20% of mRNA tags, which mapped to Nova and Ago binding sites on mRNA or miRNA. CIMS analysis provides a general and more precise means of mapping protein-RNA interactions than currently available methods and insight into the biochemical properties of such interactions in living tissues.
21258322	84	2011	Nat Struct Mol Biol	Genome-wide identification of Ago2 binding sites from mouse embryonic stem cells with and without mature microRNAs.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 19-22-nucleotide noncoding RNAs that post-transcriptionally regulate mRNA targets. We have identified endogenous miRNA binding sites in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), by performing photo-cross-linking immunoprecipitation using antibodies to Argonaute (Ago2) followed by deep sequencing of RNAs (CLIP-seq). We also performed CLIP-seq in Dicer⁻/⁻ mESCs that lack mature miRNAs, allowing us to define whether the association of Ago2 with the identified sites was miRNA dependent. A significantly enriched motif, GCACUU, was identified only in wild-type mESCs in 3' untranslated and coding regions. This motif matches the seed of a miRNA family that constitutes ~68% of the mESC miRNA population. Unexpectedly, a G-rich motif was enriched in sequences cross-linked to Ago2 in both the presence and absence of miRNAs. Expression analysis and reporter assays confirmed that the seed-related motif confers miRNA-directed regulation on host mRNAs and that the G-rich motif can modulate this regulation.
21935890	66	2011	Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA	HITS-CLIP: panoramic views of protein-RNA regulation in living cells.	The study of gene regulation in cells has recently begun to shift from a period dominated by the study of transcription factor-DNA interactions to a new focus on RNA regulation. This was sparked by the still-emerging recognition of the central role for RNA in cellular complexity emanating from the RNA World hypothesis, and has been facilitated by technologic advances, in particular high throughput RNA sequencing and crosslinking methods (RNA-Seq, CLIP, and HITS-CLIP). This study will place these advances in context, and, focusing on CLIP, will explain the method, what it can be used for, and how to approach using it. Examples of the successes, limitations, and future of the technique will be discussed.
21559008	35	2011	J Vis Exp	iCLIP--transcriptome-wide mapping of protein-RNA interactions with individual nucleotide resolution.	The unique composition and spatial arrangement of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) on a transcript guide the diverse aspects of post-transcriptional regulation. Therefore, an essential step towards understanding transcript regulation at the molecular level is to gain positional information on the binding sites of RBPs. Protein-RNA interactions can be studied using biochemical methods, but these approaches do not address RNA binding in its native cellular context. Initial attempts to study protein-RNA complexes in their cellular environment employed affinity purification or immunoprecipitation combined with differential display or microarray analysis (RIP-CHIP). These approaches were prone to identifying indirect or non-physiological interactions. In order to increase the specificity and positional resolution, a strategy referred to as CLIP (UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation) was introduced. CLIP combines UV cross-linking of proteins and RNA molecules with rigorous purification schemes including denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. In combination with high-throughput sequencing technologies, CLIP has proven as a powerful tool to study protein-RNA interactions on a genome-wide scale (referred to as HITS-CLIP or CLIP-seq). Recently, PAR-CLIP was introduced that uses photoreactive ribonucleoside analogs for cross-linking. Despite the high specificity of the obtained data, CLIP experiments often generate cDNA libraries of limited sequence complexity. This is partly due to the restricted amount of co-purified RNA and the two inefficient RNA ligation reactions required for library preparation. In addition, primer extension assays indicated that many cDNAs truncate prematurely at the crosslinked nucleotide. Such truncated cDNAs are lost during the standard CLIP library preparation protocol. We recently developed iCLIP (individual-nucleotide resolution CLIP), which captures the truncated cDNAs by replacing one of the inefficient intermolecular RNA ligation steps with a more efficient intramolecular cDNA circularization (Figure 1). Importantly, sequencing the truncated cDNAs provides insights into the position of the cross-link site at nucleotide resolution. We successfully applied iCLIP to study hnRNP C particle organization on a genome-wide scale and assess its role in splicing regulation.
21389147	24	2011	RNA	MicroRNA transfection and AGO-bound CLIP-seq data sets reveal distinct determinants of miRNA action.	Microarray expression analyses following miRNA transfection/inhibition and, more recently, Argonaute cross-linked immunoprecipitation (CLIP)-seq assays have been used to detect miRNA target sites. CLIP and expression approaches measure differing stages of miRNA functioning-initial binding of the miRNP complex and subsequent message repression. We use nonparametric predictive models to characterize a large number of known target and flanking features, utilizing miRNA transfection, HITS-CLIP, and PAR-CLIP data. In particular, we utilize the precise spatial information provided by CLIP-seq to analyze the predictive effect of target flanking features. We observe distinct target determinants between expression-based and CLIP-based data. Target flanking features such as flanking region conservation are an important AGO-binding determinant-we hypothesize that CLIP experiments have a preference for strongly bound miRNP-target interactions involving adjacent RNA-binding proteins that increase the strength of cross-linking. In contrast, seed-related features are major determinants in expression-based studies, but less so for CLIP-seq studies, and increased miRNA concentrations typical of transfection studies contribute to this difference. While there is a good overlap between miRNA targets detected by miRNA transfection and CLIP-seq, the detection of CLIP-seq targets is largely independent of the level of subsequent mRNA degradation. Also, models built using CLIP-seq data show strong predictive power between independent CLIP-seq data sets, but are not strongly predictive for expression change. Similarly, models built from expression data are not strongly predictive for CLIP-seq data sets, supporting the finding that the determinants of miRNA binding and mRNA degradation differ. Predictive models and results are available at http://servers.binf.ku.dk/antar/.
21441577	22	2011	Bioinformatics	The sufficient minimal set of miRNA seed types.	MOTIVATION: Pairing between the target sequence and the 6-8 nt long seed sequence of the miRNA presents the most important feature for miRNA target site prediction. Novel high-throughput technologies such as Argonaute HITS-CLIP afford meanwhile a detailed study of miRNA:mRNA duplices. These interaction maps enable a first discrimination between functional and non-functional target sites in a bulky fashion. Prediction algorithms apply different seed paradigms to identify miRNA target sites. Therefore, a quantitative assessment of miRNA target site prediction is of major interest.RESULTS: We identified a set of canonical seed types based on a transcriptome wide analysis of experimentally verified functional target sites. We confirmed the specificity of long seeds but we found that the majority of functional target sites are formed by less specific seeds of only 6 nt indicating a crucial role of this type. A substantial fraction of genuine target sites arenon-conserved. Moreover, the majority of functional sites remain uncovered by common prediction methods.
21994224	11	2011	Bioinformatics	Pyicos: a versatile toolkit for the analysis of high-throughput sequencing data.	MOTIVATION: High-throughput sequencing (HTS) has revolutionized gene regulation studies and is now fundamental for the detection of protein-DNA and protein-RNA binding, as well as for measuring RNA expression. With increasing variety and sequencing depth of HTS datasets, the need for more flexible and memory-efficient tools to analyse them is growing.RESULTS: We describe Pyicos, a powerful toolkit for the analysis of mapped reads from diverse HTS experiments: ChIP-Seq, either punctuated or broad signals, CLIP-Seq and RNA-Seq. We prove the effectiveness of Pyicos to select for significant signals and show that its accuracy is comparable and sometimes superior to that of methods specifically designed for each particular type of experiment. Pyicos facilitates the analysis of a variety of HTS datatypes through its flexibility and memory efficiency, providing a useful framework for data integration into models of regulatory genomics.AVAILABILITY: Open-source software, with tutorials and protocol files, is available at http://regulatorygenomics.upf.edu/pyicos or as a Galaxy server at http://regulatorygenomics.upf.edu/galaxyCONTACT: eduardo.eyras@upf.eduSUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
21301209	5	2011	RNA Biol	The miRNA-targetome of KSHV and EBV in human B-cells.	Micro-RNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules which provide a subtle layer of regulation to thousands of cellular genes. The identification of virally encoded miRNAs added another layer of complexity to the dense interaction between viruses and their natural hosts. While it has been shown that viral miRNAs can regulate both cellular and viral gene expression, target identification has been a difficult and cumbersome task. The immunoprecipitation of Argonaute (Ago)-protein containing RNA-induced silencing complexes (RISC) followed by microarray analysis (RIP-Chip) allows the identification of miRNA-targetomes at whole transcriptome level. We applied Ago2-based RIP-Chip to identify cellular transcripts targeted by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV, n=114), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, n=44) and cellular miRNAs (n=2,337) in six latently infected or stably transduced human B-cell lines. While RIP-Chip yields a plethora of high-confidence miRNA targets and provides a quantitative estimate of miRNA function, additional biochemical methods like HITS-CLIP or PAR-CLIP and bioinformatic analysis are required to identify individual miRNA binding sites. Together, these methods will be useful to unravel the network of regulation exerted by both viral and cellular miRNAs, thereby providing the basis for functional studies on miRNA-mediated regulation of gene expression in herpesvirus infections.
21736879	1	2011	J Theor Biol	Human microRNA target identification by RRSM.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small endogenously expressed non-coding RNAs that regulate target messenger RNAs in various biological processes. In recent years, there have been many studies concentrated on the discovery of new miRNAs and identification of their mRNA targets. Although researchers have identified many miRNAs, few miRNA targets have been identified by actual experimental methods. To expedite the identification of miRNA targets for experimental verification, in the literature approaches based on the sequence or microarray expression analysis have been established to discover the potential miRNA targets. In this study, we focus on the human miRNA target prediction and propose a generalized relative R² method (RRSM) to find many high-confidence targets. Many targets have been confirmed from previous studies. The targets for several miRNAs discovered by the HITS-CLIP method in a recent study have also been selected by our study.
21057496	175	2010	Nat Methods	Analysis and design of RNA sequencing experiments for identifying isoform regulation.	Through alternative splicing, most human genes express multiple isoforms that often differ in function. To infer isoform regulation from high-throughput sequencing of cDNA fragments (RNA-seq), we developed the mixture-of-isoforms (MISO) model, a statistical model that estimates expression of alternatively spliced exons and isoforms and assesses confidence in these estimates. Incorporation of mRNA fragment length distribution in paired-end RNA-seq greatly improved estimation of alternative-splicing levels. MISO also detects differentially regulated exons or isoforms. Application of MISO implicated the RNA splicing factor hnRNP H1 in the regulation of alternative cleavage and polyadenylation, a role that was supported by UV cross-linking-immunoprecipitation sequencing (CLIP-seq) analysis in human cells. Our results provide a probabilistic framework for RNA-seq analysis, give functional insights into pre-mRNA processing and yield guidelines for the optimal design of RNA-seq experiments for studies of gene and isoform expression.
20062054	107	2010	Nat Struct Mol Biol	Comprehensive discovery of endogenous Argonaute binding sites in Caenorhabditis elegans.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression by guiding Argonaute proteins to specific target mRNA sequences. Identification of bona fide miRNA target sites in animals is challenging because of uncertainties regarding the base-pairing requirements between miRNA and target as well as the location of functional binding sites within mRNAs. Here we present the results of a comprehensive strategy aimed at isolating endogenous mRNA target sequences bound by the Argonaute protein ALG-1 in C. elegans. Using cross-linking and ALG-1 immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq), we identified extensive ALG-1 interactions with specific 3' untranslated region (UTR) and coding exon sequences and discovered features that distinguish miRNA complex binding sites in 3' UTRs from those in other genic regions. Furthermore, our analyses revealed a striking enrichment of Argonaute binding sites in genes important for miRNA function, suggesting an autoregulatory role that may confer robustness to the miRNA pathway.
21037263	103	2010	Nucleic Acids Res	starBase: a database for exploring microRNA-mRNA interaction maps from Argonaute CLIP-Seq and Degradome-Seq data.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) represent an important class of small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) that regulate gene expression by targeting messenger RNAs. However, assigning miRNAs to their regulatory target genes remains technically challenging. Recently, high-throughput CLIP-Seq and degradome sequencing (Degradome-Seq) methods have been applied to identify the sites of Argonaute interaction and miRNA cleavage sites, respectively. In this study, we introduce a novel database, starBase (sRNA target Base), which we have developed to facilitate the comprehensive exploration of miRNA-target interaction maps from CLIP-Seq and Degradome-Seq data. The current version includes high-throughput sequencing data generated from 21 CLIP-Seq and 10 Degradome-Seq experiments from six organisms. By analyzing millions of mapped CLIP-Seq and Degradome-Seq reads, we identified ∼1 million Ago-binding clusters and ∼2 million cleaved target clusters in animals and plants, respectively. Analyses of these clusters, and of target sites predicted by 6 miRNA target prediction programs, resulted in our identification of approximately 400,000 and approximately 66,000 miRNA-target regulatory relationships from CLIP-Seq and Degradome-Seq data, respectively. Furthermore, two web servers were provided to discover novel miRNA target sites from CLIP-Seq and Degradome-Seq data. Our web implementation supports diverse query types and exploration of common targets, gene ontologies and pathways. The starBase is available at http://starbase.sysu.edu.cn/.
20659473	47	2010	Gastroenterology	MicroRNAs control intestinal epithelial differentiation, architecture, and barrier function.	BACKGROUND &amp; AIMS: Whereas the importance of microRNA (miRNA) for the development of several tissues is well established, its role in the intestine is unknown. We aimed to quantify the complete miRNA expression profile of the mammalian intestinal mucosa and to determine the contribution of miRNAs to intestinal homeostasis using genetic means.METHODS: We determined the miRNA transcriptome of the mouse intestinal mucosa using ultrahigh throughput sequencing. Using high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP), we identified miRNA-messenger RNA target relationships in the jejunum. We employed gene ablation of the obligatory miRNA-processing enzyme Dicer1 to derive mice deficient for all miRNAs in intestinal epithelia.RESULTS: miRNA abundance varies dramatically in the intestinal mucosa, from 1 read per million to 250,000. Of the 453 miRNA families identified, mmu-miR-192 is the most highly expressed in both the small and large intestinal mucosa, and there is a 53% overlap in the top 15 expressed miRNAs between the 2 tissues. The intestinal epithelium of Dicer1(loxP/loxP);Villin-Cre mutant mice is disorganized, with a decrease in goblet cells, a dramatic increase in apoptosis in crypts of both jejunum and colon, and accelerated jejunal cell migration. Furthermore, intestinal barrier function is impaired in Dicer1-deficient mice, resulting in intestinal inflammation with lymphocyte and neutrophil infiltration. Our list of miRNA-messenger RNA targeting relationships in the small intestinal mucosa provides insight into the molecular mechanisms behind the phenotype of Dicer1 mutant mice.CONCLUSIONS: We have identified all intestinal miRNAs and shown using gene ablation of Dicer1 that miRNAs play a vital role in the differentiation and function of the intestinal epithelium.
20620871	35	2010	Neuron	Nova2 regulates neuronal migration through an RNA switch in disabled-1 signaling.	Neuronal migration leads to a highly organized laminar structure in the mammalian brain, and its misregulation causes lissencephaly and behavioral and cognitive defects. Reelin signaling, which is mediated in part by a key adaptor, disabled-1 (Dab1), plays a critical but incompletely understood role in this process. We found that the neuron-specific RNA-binding protein Nova2 regulates neuronal migration in late-generated cortical and Purkinje neurons. An unbiased HITS-CLIP and exon junction array search for Nova-dependent reelin-pathway RNAs at E14.5 revealed only one candidate-an alternatively spliced isoform of Dab1 (Dab1.7bc). In utero electroporation demonstrated that Dab1.7bc was sufficient to induce neuronal migration defects in wild-type mice and exacerbate defects when Dab1 levels were reduced, whereas Dab1 overexpression mitigates defects in Nova2 null mice. Thus, Nova2 regulates an RNA switch controlling the ability of Dab1 to mediate neuronal responsiveness to reelin signaling and neuronal migration, suggesting new links between splicing regulation, brain disease, and development.
20407637	20	2010	Front Neural Circuits	The Neuronal Splicing Factor Nova Co-Localizes with Target RNAs in the Dendrite.	Nova proteins are neuron-specific RNA binding proteins targeted by autoantibodies in a disorder manifest by failure of motor inhibition, and they regulate splicing and alternative 3' processing. Nova regulates splicing of RNAs encoding synaptic proteins, including the inhibitory glycine receptor alpha2 subunit (GlyRalpha2), and binds to others, including the GIRK2 channel. We found that Nova harbors functional NES and NLS elements, shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm, and that 50% of the protein localizes to the soma-dendritic compartment. Immunofluoresence and EM analysis of spinal cord motor neurons demonstrated that Nova co-localizes beneath synaptic contacts in dendrites with the same RNA, GlyRalpha2, whose splicing it regulates in the nucleus. HITS-CLIP identified intronic and 3' UTR sites where Nova binds to GlyRalpha2 and GIRK2 transcripts in the brain. This led directly to the identification of a 3' UTR localization element that mediates Nova-dependent localization of GIRK2 in primary neurons. These data demonstrate that HITS-CLIP can identify functional RNA localization elements, and they suggest new links between the regulation of nuclear RNA processing and mRNA localization.
19536157	480	2009	Nature	Argonaute HITS-CLIP decodes microRNA-mRNA interaction maps.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have critical roles in the regulation of gene expression; however, as miRNA activity requires base pairing with only 6-8 nucleotides of messenger RNA, predicting target mRNAs is a major challenge. Recently, high-throughput sequencing of RNAs isolated by crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) has identified functional protein-RNA interaction sites. Here we use HITS-CLIP to covalently crosslink native argonaute (Ago, also called Eif2c) protein-RNA complexes in mouse brain. This produced two simultaneous data sets-Ago-miRNA and Ago-mRNA binding sites-that were combined with bioinformatic analysis to identify interaction sites between miRNA and target mRNA. We validated genome-wide interaction maps for miR-124, and generated additional maps for the 20 most abundant miRNAs present in P13 mouse brain. Ago HITS-CLIP provides a general platform for exploring the specificity and range of miRNA action in vivo, and identifies precise sequences for targeting clinically relevant miRNA-mRNA interactions.
19136955	182	2009	Nat Struct Mol Biol	An RNA code for the FOX2 splicing regulator revealed by mapping RNA-protein interactions in stem cells.	The elucidation of a code for regulated splicing has been a long-standing goal in understanding the control of post-transcriptional gene expression events that are crucial for cell survival, differentiation and development. We decoded functional RNA elements in vivo by constructing an RNA map for the cell type-specific splicing regulator FOX2 (also known as RBM9) via cross-linking immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq) in human embryonic stem cells. The map identified a large cohort of specific FOX2 targets, many of which are themselves splicing regulators, and comparison between the FOX2 binding profile and validated splicing events revealed a general rule for FOX2-regulated exon inclusion or skipping in a position-dependent manner. These findings suggest that FOX2 functions as a critical regulator of a splicing network, and we further show that FOX2 is important for the survival of human embryonic stem cells.
19116412	92	2009	Genome Res	Splicing factor SFRS1 recognizes a functionally diverse landscape of RNA transcripts.	Metazoan genes are encrypted with at least two superimposed codes: the genetic code to specify the primary structure of proteins and the splicing code to expand their proteomic output via alternative splicing. Here, we define the specificity of a central regulator of pre-mRNA splicing, the conserved, essential splicing factor SFRS1. Cross-linking immunoprecipitation and high-throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq) identified 23,632 binding sites for SFRS1 in the transcriptome of cultured human embryonic kidney cells. SFRS1 was found to engage many different classes of functionally distinct transcripts including mRNA, miRNA, snoRNAs, ncRNAs, and conserved intergenic transcripts of unknown function. The majority of these diverse transcripts share a purine-rich consensus motif corresponding to the canonical SFRS1 binding site. The consensus site was not only enriched in exons cross-linked to SFRS1 in vivo, but was also enriched in close proximity to splice sites. mRNAs encoding RNA processing factors were significantly overrepresented, suggesting that SFRS1 may broadly influence the post-transcriptional control of gene expression in vivo. Finally, a search for the SFRS1 consensus motif within the Human Gene Mutation Database identified 181 mutations in 82 different genes that disrupt predicted SFRS1 binding sites. This comprehensive analysis substantially expands the known roles of human SR proteins in the regulation of a diverse array of RNA transcripts.
18978773	316	2008	Nature	HITS-CLIP yields genome-wide insights into brain alternative RNA processing.	Protein-RNA interactions have critical roles in all aspects of gene expression. However, applying biochemical methods to understand such interactions in living tissues has been challenging. Here we develop a genome-wide means of mapping protein-RNA binding sites in vivo, by high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP). HITS-CLIP analysis of the neuron-specific splicing factor Nova revealed extremely reproducible RNA-binding maps in multiple mouse brains. These maps provide genome-wide in vivo biochemical footprints confirming the previous prediction that the position of Nova binding determines the outcome of alternative splicing; moreover, they are sufficiently powerful to predict Nova action de novo. HITS-CLIP revealed a large number of Nova-RNA interactions in 3' untranslated regions, leading to the discovery that Nova regulates alternative polyadenylation in the brain. HITS-CLIP, therefore, provides a robust, unbiased means to identify functional protein-RNA interactions in vivo.
