PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
26059817	0	2015	J Cell Physiol	C-ing the Genome: A Compendium of Chromosome Conformation Capture Methods to Study Higher-Order Chromatin Organization.	Three-dimensional organization of the chromatin has important roles in transcription, replication, DNA repair, and pathologic events such as translocations. There are two fundamental ways to study higher-order chromatin organization: microscopic and molecular approaches. In this review, we briefly introduce the molecular approaches, focusing on chromosome conformation capture or&quot;3C&quot; technology and its derivatives, which can be used to probe chromatin folding at resolutions beyond that provided by microscopy techniques. We further discuss the different types of data generated by the 3C-based methods and how they can be used to answer distinct biological questions. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
26059046	0	2015	Am J Med Genet A	A de novo 1.58 Mb deletion, including MAP2K6 and mapping 1.28 Mb upstream to SOX9, identified in a patient with Pierre Robin sequence and osteopenia with multiple fractures.	Defects of long-range regulatory elements of dosage-sensitive genes represent an under-recognized mechanism underlying genetic diseases. Haploinsufficiency of SOX9, the gene essential for development of testes and differentiation of chondrocytes, results in campomelic dysplasia, a skeletal malformation syndrome often associated with sex reversal. Chromosomal rearrangements with breakpoints mapping up to 1.6 Mb up- and downstream to SOX9, and disrupting its distant cis-regulatory elements, have been described in patients with milder forms of campomelic dysplasia, Pierre Robin sequence, and sex reversal. We present an ∼1.58 Mb deletion mapping ∼1.28 Mb upstream to SOX9 that encompasses its putative long-range cis-regulatory element(s) and MAP2K6 in a patient with Pierre Robin sequence and osteopenia with multiple fractures. Low bone mass panel testing using massively parallel sequencing of 23 nuclear genes, including COL1A1 and COL1A2 was negative. Based on the previous mouse model of Map2k6, suggesting that Sox9 is likely a downstream target of the p38 MAPK pathway, and our previous chromosome conformation capture-on-chip (4C) data showing potential interactions between SOX9 promoter and MAP2K6, we hypothesize that deletion of MAP2K6 might have affected SOX9 expression and contributed to our patient's phenotype. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
26043745	0	2015	Ann Bot	Flow sorting of C-genome chromosomes from wild relatives of wheat Aegilops markgrafii, Ae. triuncialis and Ae. cylindrica, and their molecular organization.	BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Aegilops markgrafii (CC) and its natural hybrids Ae. triuncialis (U(t)U(t)C(t)C(t)) and Ae. cylindrica (D(c)D(c)C(c)C(c)) represent a rich reservoir of useful genes for improvement of bread wheat (Triticum aestivum), but the limited information available on their genome structure and the shortage of molecular (cyto-) genetic tools hamper the utilization of the extant genetic diversity. This study provides the complete karyotypes in the three species obtained after fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with repetitive DNA probes, and evaluates the potential of flow cytometric chromosome sorting.METHODS: The flow karyotypes obtained after the analysis of 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-stained chromosomes were characterized and the chromosome content of the peaks on the flow karyotypes was determined by FISH. Twenty-nine conserved orthologous set (COS) markers covering all seven wheat homoeologous chromosome groups were used for PCR with DNA amplified from flow-sorted chromosomes and genomic DNA.KEY RESULTS: FISH with repetitive DNA probes revealed that chromosomes 4C, 5C, 7C(t), T6U(t)S.6U(t)L-5C(t)L, 1C(c) and 5D(c) could be sorted with purities ranging from 66 to 91 %, while the remaining chromosomes could be sorted in groups of 2-5. This identified a partial wheat-C-genome homology for group 4 and 5 chromosomes. In addition, 1C chromosomes were homologous with group 1 of wheat; a small segment from group 2 indicated 1C-2C rearrangement. An extensively rearranged structure of chromosome 7C relative to wheat was also detected.CONCLUSIONS: The possibility of purifying Aegilops chromosomes provides an attractive opportunity to investigate the structure and evolution of the Aegilops C genome and to develop molecular tools to facilitate the identification of alien chromatin and support alien introgression breeding in bread wheat.
26034064	0	2015	Bioinformatics	FourCSeq: analysis of 4C sequencing data.	MOTIVATION: Circularized Chromosome Conformation Capture (4C) is a powerful technique for studying the spatial interactions of a specific genomic region called the 'viewpoint' with the rest of the genome, both in a single condition or comparing different experimental conditions or cell types. Observed ligation frequencies typically show a strong, regular dependence on genomic distance from the viewpoint, on top of which specific interaction peaks are superimposed. Here, we address the computational task to find these specific peaks and to detect changes between different biological conditions.RESULTS: We model the overall trend of decreasing interaction frequency with genomic distance by fitting a smooth monotonically decreasing function to suitably transformed count data. Based on the fit, z-scores are calculated from the residuals, and high z-scores are interpreted as peaks providing evidence for specific interactions. To compare different conditions, we normalize fragment counts between samples, and call for differential contact frequencies using the statistical method DESEQ2: adapted from RNA-Seq analysis.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: A full end-to-end analysis pipeline is implemented in the R package FourCSeq available at www.bioconductor.org.CONTACT: felix.klein@embl.de or whuber@embl.deSupplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
25922992	0	2015	Elife	A simple biophysical model emulates budding yeast chromosome condensation.	Mitotic chromosomes were one of the first cell biological structures to be described, yet their molecular architecture remains poorly understood. We have devised a simple biophysical model of a 300 kb-long nucleosome chain, the size of a budding yeast chromosome, constrained by interactions between binding sites of the chromosomal condensin complex, a key component of interphase and mitotic chromosomes. Comparisons of computational and experimental (4C) interaction maps, and other biophysical features, allow us to predict a mode of condensin action. Stochastic condensin-mediated pairwise interactions along the nucleosome chain generate native-like chromosome features and recapitulate chromosome compaction and individualization during mitotic condensation. Higher order interactions between condensin binding sites explain the data less well. Our results suggest that basic assumptions about chromatin behavior go a long way to explain chromosome architecture and are able to generate a molecular model of what the inside of a chromosome is likely to look like.
25901194	0	2015	Am J Transl Res	ADP-ribosylation factor-like 4C (ARL4C), a novel ovarian cancer metastasis suppressor, identified by integrated genomics.	Understanding the molecular mechanisms involving the initiation, progression, and metastasis of ovarian cancer is important for the prevention, detection, and treatment of ovarian cancer. In this study, two ovarian cancer cell lines, HO-8910 and its derivative HO-8910PM with highly metastatic potential, were applied to comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis. We found 14 chromosome fragments with different copy numbers between the two cell lines, one (2q36.1-37.3) of which was confirmed to be one-copy loss in HO-8910PM by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Using the microarray data on gene expression profiles from these cell lines, 6 significantly expression-decreased genes located on 2q36.1-37.3 in HO-8910PM were identified. Of the 6 genes, ARL4C was identified as a novel ovarian cancer-related gene using integrated molecular and genomic analyses. ARL4C mRNA expression was validated by quantitative PCR to be markedly decreased in HO-8910PM cells, compared to that in HO-8910. Both overexpression and knockdown of ARL4C demonstrated that low ARL4C expression promotes the migration but not influences proliferation capability of ovarian cancer cells in vitro, indicating its specific role in ovarian cancer progression. Furthermore, ovarian cancer patients with medium and high expression of ARL4C mRNA had a favorable prognosis compared to those with low expression, suggesting the ARL4C could be a potential predictor for ovarian cancer prognosis.
25845242	0	2015	Mol Biol (Mosk)	[Spatial organization of house-keeping genes in interphase nuclei].	Spatial organization of the eukaryotic genome is tightly connected to its functioning. In particular, the interaction of gene promoters with remote enhancer elements in active chromatin hubs, as well as the recruitment of genes to the common transcription factories plays an important role in regulation of gene transcription. Most of works related to the analysis of spatial interaction of genome regulatory elements relies on models of tissue-specific genes. Meanwhile, it remains unclear to which extent the spatial organization of chromosomes is guided by house-keeping genes that are transcribed in most of cell types and outnumber the transcribed tissue-specific genes. To address this question, we used the 4C technique to characterize genome-wide the spatial contacts of the chicken house-keeping genes CARHSP1 and TRAP1 situated on chromosome 14. The promoters of these genes had an increased frequency of interaction with chromosome regions enriched in CpG islands and binding motifs for the ubiquitous transcription factor Sp1, both of which mark promoters of house-keeping genes, and overall with transcriptionally active regions. By contrast, the analysis of interaction of a gene poor region of chromosome 14 revealed no such preferences. The evidence for the interaction of house-keeping gene promoters were also obtained in independent cytological experiments aimed at visualization of non-methylated CpG islands in individual nuclei of human cells, which showed clustering of CpG islands in the nuclear space. Altogether, the results of our work suggest that the interaction of house-keeping genes constitutes an important factor that determines the spatial organization of interphase chromosomes.
25831887	0	2015	Mol Biol (Mosk)	[Spatial organization of interphase chromosomes and the role of chromatin fiber dynamycs in the positioning of genome elements].	Many studies are devoted to the analysis ofinterphase chromosome architecture due to the evidence of functional-dependent spatial organization of the genome. These studies are based on classical cytological methods as well as on biochemical approaches (3C, 4C, 5C, Hi-C) allowing for the detection of long-range interactions between fragments of chromatin fibers, including the genome-wide interactions. In this review, we discuss the results of these researches which make it possible to explain functional-dependent multilevel compartmentalization of the nucleous and unravel the principals of high-level chromatin organization. Special attention is paid to the enchancer-promoter interactions important for the regulation of gene expression. Accordingly, we consider the model of an active chromatin hub and the alternative model of an active chromatin compartment, which was proposed based on reconsideration of some steps of the 3C procedure.
25567984	0	2015	Nucleic Acids Res	DNA binding by FOXP3 domain-swapped dimer suggests mechanisms of long-range chromosomal interactions.	FOXP3 is a lineage-specific transcription factor that is required for regulatory T cell development and function. In this study, we determined the crystal structure of the FOXP3 forkhead domain bound to DNA. The structure reveals that FOXP3 can form a stable domain-swapped dimer to bridge DNA in the absence of cofactors, suggesting that FOXP3 may play a role in long-range gene interactions. To test this hypothesis, we used circular chromosome conformation capture coupled with high throughput sequencing (4C-seq) to analyze FOXP3-dependent genomic contacts around a known FOXP3-bound locus, Ptpn22. Our studies reveal that FOXP3 induces significant changes in the chromatin contacts between the Ptpn22 locus and other Foxp3-regulated genes, reflecting a mechanism by which FOXP3 reorganizes the genome architecture to coordinate the expression of its target genes. Our results suggest that FOXP3 mediates long-range chromatin interactions as part of its mechanisms to regulate specific gene expression in regulatory T cells.
24561615	2	2014	Nucleic Acids Res	fourSig: a method for determining chromosomal interactions in 4C-Seq data.	The ability to correlate chromosome conformation and gene expression gives a great deal of information regarding the strategies used by a cell to properly regulate gene activity. 4C-Seq is a relatively new and increasingly popular technology where the set of genomic interactions generated by a single point in the genome can be determined. 4C-Seq experiments generate large, complicated data sets and it is imperative that signal is properly distinguished from noise. Currently, there are a limited number of methods for analyzing 4C-Seq data. Here, we present a new method, fourSig, which in addition to being precise and simple to use also includes a new feature that prioritizes detected interactions. Our results demonstrate the efficacy of fourSig with previously published and novel 4C-Seq data sets and show that our significance prioritization correlates with the ability to reproducibly detect interactions among replicates.
25431936	1	2014	Epigenomics	Interpreting 4C-Seq data: how far can we go?	
24860160	1	2014	Bioinformatics	Identification of chromosomal translocation hotspots via scan statistics.	MOTIVATION: The detection of genomic regions unusually rich in a given pattern is an important undertaking in the analysis of next-generation sequencing data. Recent studies of chromosomal translocations in activated B lymphocytes have identified regions that are frequently translocated to c-myc oncogene. A quantitative method for the identification of translocation hotspots was crucial to this study. Here we improve this analysis by using a simple probabilistic model and the framework provided by scan statistics to define the number and location of translocation breakpoint hotspots. A key feature of our method is that it provides a global chromosome-wide nominal control level to clustering, as opposed to previous methods based on local criteria. While being motivated by a specific application, the detection of unusual clusters is a widespread problem in bioinformatics. We expect our method to be useful in the analysis of data from other experimental approaches such as of ChIP-seq and 4C-seq.RESULTS: The analysis of translocations from B lymphocytes with the method described here reveals the presence of longer hotspots when compared with those defined previously. Further, we show that the hotspot size changes substantially in the absence of DNA repair protein 53BP1. When 53BP1 deficiency is combined with overexpression of activation-induced cytidine deaminase, the hotspot length increases even further. These changes are not detected by previous methods that use local significance criteria for clustering. Our method is also able to identify several exclusive translocation hotspots located in genes of known tumor supressors.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The detection of translocation hotspots is done with hot_scan, a program implemented in R and Perl. Source code and documentation are freely available for download at https://github.com/itojal/hot_scan.
24448439	1	2014	Nucleus	Implications of COMT long-range interactions on the phenotypic variability of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.	22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) results from a hemizygous microdeletion on chromosome 22 and is characterized by extensive phenotypic variability. Penetrance of signs, including congenital heart, craniofacial, and neurobehavioral abnormalities, varies widely and is not well correlated with genotype. The three-dimensional structure of the genome may help explain some of this variability. The physical interaction profile of a given gene locus with other genetic elements, such as enhancers and co-regulated genes, contributes to its regulation. Thus, it is possible that regulatory interactions with elements outside the deletion region are disrupted in the disease state and modulate the resulting spectrum of symptoms. COMT, a gene within the commonly deleted ~3 Mb region has been implicated as a contributor to the neurological features frequently found in 22q11DS patients. We used this locus as bait in a 4C-seq experiment to investigate genome-wide interaction profiles in B lymphocyte and fibroblast cell lines derived from both 22q11DS and unaffected individuals. All normal B lymphocyte lines displayed local, conserved chromatin looping interactions with regions that are lost in atypical and distal deletions, which may mediate similarities between typical, atypical, and distal 22q11 deletion phenotypes. There are also distinct clusterings of cis interactions based on disease state. We identified regions of differential trans interactions present in normal, and lost in deletion-carrying, B lymphocyte cell lines. This data suggests that hemizygous chromosomal deletions such as 22q11DS can have widespread effects on chromatin organization, and may contribute to the inherent phenotypic variability.
25385647	0	2014	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Mapping of long-range INS promoter interactions reveals a role for calcium-activated chloride channel ANO1 in insulin secretion.	We used circular chromatin conformation capture (4C) to identify a physical contact in human pancreatic islets between the region near the insulin (INS) promoter and the ANO1 gene, lying 68 Mb away on human chromosome 11, which encodes a Ca(2+)-dependent chloride ion channel. In response to glucose, this contact was strengthened and ANO1 expression increased, whereas inhibition of INS gene transcription by INS promoter targeting siRNA decreased ANO1 expression, revealing a regulatory effect of INS promoter on ANO1 expression. Knockdown of ANO1 expression caused decreased insulin secretion in human islets, establishing a physical proximity-dependent feedback loop involving INS transcription, ANO1 expression, and insulin secretion. To explore a possible role of ANO1 in insulin metabolism, we carried out experiments in Ano1(+/-) mice. We observed reduced serum insulin levels and insulin-to-glucose ratios in high-fat diet-fed Ano1(+/-) mice relative to Ano1(+/+) mice fed the same diet. Our results show that determination of long-range contacts within the nucleus can be used to detect novel and physiologically relevant mechanisms. They also show that networks of long-range physical contacts are important to the regulation of insulin metabolism.
25280477	0	2014	J Mol Cell Biol	Hot spots of DNA double-strand breaks and genomic contacts of human rDNA units are involved in epigenetic regulation.	DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are involved in many cellular mechanisms, including replication, transcription, and genome rearrangements. The recent observation that hot spots of DSBs in human chromosomes delimit DNA domains that possess coordinately expressed genes suggests a strong relationship between the organization of transcription patterns and hot spots of DSBs. In this study, we performed mapping of hot spots of DSBs in a human 43-kb ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeated unit. We observed that rDNA units corresponded to the most fragile sites in human chromosomes and that these units possessed at least nine specific regions containing clusters of extremely frequently occurring DSBs, which were located exclusively in non-coding intergenic spacer (IGS) regions. The hot spots of DSBs corresponded to only a specific subset of DNase-hypersensitive sites, and coincided with CTCF, PARP1, and HNRNPA2B1 binding sites, and H3K4me3 marks. Our rDNA-4C data indicate that the regions of IGS containing the hot spots of DSBs often form contacts with specific regions in different chromosomes, including the pericentromeric regions, as well as regions that are characterized by H3K27ac and H3K4me3 marks, CTCF binding sites, ChIA-PET and RIP signals, and high levels of DSBs. The data suggest a strong link between chromosome breakage and several different mechanisms of epigenetic regulation of gene expression.
25151170	0	2014	Methods Mol Biol	DamID as an approach to studying long-distance chromatin interactions.	How transcription is controlled by distally located cis-regulatory elements is an active area of research in biology. As such, there have been many techniques developed to probe these long-distance chromatin interactions. Here, we focus on one such method, called DamID (van Steensel and Henikoff, Nat Biotechnol 18(4):424-428, 2000). While other methods like 3C (Dekker et al., Science 295(5558):1306-1311, 2002), 4C (Simonis et al., Nat Genet 38(11):1348-1354, 2006; Zhao et al., Nat Genet 38(11):1341-1347, 2006), and 5C (Dostie et al., Genome Res 16(10):1299-1309, 2006) are undoubtedly powerful, the DamID method can offer some advantages over these methods if the genetic locus can be easily modified. The lack of tissue fixation, the low amounts of starting material required to perform the experiment, and the relatively modest hardware requirements make DamID experiments an interesting alternative to consider when examining long-distance chromatin interactions.
25146886	0	2014	Plant J	Altered expression of Aurora kinases in Arabidopsis results in aneu- and polyploidization.	Aurora is an evolutionary conserved protein kinase family involved in monitoring of chromosome segregation via phosphorylation of different substrates. In plants, however, the involvement of Aurora proteins in meiosis and in sensing microtubule attachment remains to be proven, although the downstream components leading to the targeting of spindle assembly checkpoint signals to anaphase-promoting complex have been described. To analyze the three members of Aurora family (AtAurora1, -2, and -3) of Arabidopsis we employed different combinations of T-DNA insertion mutants and/or RNAi transformants. Meiotic defects and the formation of unreduced pollen were revealed including plants with an increased ploidy level. The effect of reduced expression of Aurora was mimicked by application of the ATP-competitive Aurora inhibitor II. In addition, strong overexpression of any member of the AtAurora family is not possible. Only tagged or truncated forms of Aurora kinases can be overexpressed. Expression of truncated AtAurora1 resulted in a high number of aneuploids in Arabidopsis, while expression of AtAurora1-TAPi construct in tobacco resulted in 4C (possible tetraploid) progeny. In conclusion, our data demonstrate an essential role of Aurora kinases in the monitoring of meiosis in plants.
25078398	0	2014	Bioinformatics	Basic4Cseq: an R/Bioconductor package for analyzing 4C-seq data.	SUMMARY: Basic4Cseq is an R/Bioconductor package for basic filtering, analysis and subsequent near-cis visualization of 4C-seq data. The package processes aligned 4C-seq raw data stored in binary alignment/map (BAM) format and maps the short reads to a corresponding virtual fragment library. Functions are included to create virtual fragment libraries providing chromosome position and further information on 4C-seq fragments (length and uniqueness of the fragment ends, and blindness of a fragment) for any BSGenome package. An optional filter is included for BAM files to remove invalid 4C-seq reads, and further filter functions are offered for 4C-seq fragments. Additionally, basic quality controls based on the read distribution are included. Fragment data in the vicinity of the experiment's viewpoint are visualized as coverage plot based on a running median approach and a multi-scale contact profile. Wig files or csv files of the fragment data can be exported for further analyses and visualizations of interactions with other programs.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Basic4Cseq is implemented in R and available at http://www.bioconductor.org/. A vignette with detailed descriptions of the functions is included in the package.CONTACT: Carolin.Walter@uni-muenster.deSUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
24736527	0	2014	Epigenetics	The clustering of CpG islands may constitute an important determinant of the 3D organization of interphase chromosomes.	We used the 4C-Seq technique to characterize the genome-wide patterns of spatial contacts of several CpG islands located on chromosome 14 in cultured chicken lymphoid and erythroid cells. We observed a clear tendency for the spatial clustering of CpG islands present on the same and different chromosomes, regardless of the presence or absence of promoters within these CpG islands. Accordingly, we observed preferential spatial contacts between Sp1 binding motifs and other GC-rich genomic elements, including the DNA sequence motifs capable of forming G-quadruplexes. However, an anchor placed in a gene/CpG island-poor area formed spatial contacts with other gene/CpG island-poor areas on chromosome 14 and other chromosomes. These results corroborate the two-compartment model of the spatial organization of interphase chromosomes and suggest that the clustering of CpG islands constitutes an important determinant of the 3D organization of the eukaryotic genome in the cell nucleus. Using the ChIP-Seq technique, we mapped the genome-wide CTCF deposition sites in the chicken lymphoid and erythroid cells that were used for the 4C analysis. We observed a good correlation between the density of CTCF deposition sites and the level of 4C signals for the anchors located in CpG islands but not for an anchor located in a gene desert. It is thus possible that CTCF contributes to the clustering of CpG islands observed in our experiments.
24526453	0	2014	J Appl Genet	The genetics of resistance to powdery mildew in cultivated oats (Avena sativa L.): current status of major genes.	The genetics of resistance to powdery mildew caused by Blumeria graminis f. sp. avenae of four cultivated oats was studied using monosomic analysis. Cultivar 'Bruno' carries a gene (Pm6) that shows a recessive mode of inheritance and is located on chromosome 10D. Cultivar 'Jumbo' possesses a dominant resistance gene (Pm1) on chromosome 1C. In cultivar 'Rollo', in addition to the gene Pm3 on chromosome 17A, a second dominant resistance gene (Pm8) was identified and assigned to chromosome 4C. In breeding line APR 122, resistance was conditioned by a dominant resistance gene (Pm7) that was allocated to chromosome 13A. Genetic maps established for resistance genes Pm1, Pm6 and Pm7 employing amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) markers indicated that these genes are independent of each other, supporting the results from monosomic analysis.
24465835	0	2014	PLoS One	Nuclear DNA content variation in life history phases of the Bonnemasoniaceae (Rhodophyta).	Nuclear DNA content in gametophytes and sporophytes or the prostrate phases of the following species of Bonnemaisoniaceae (Asparagopsis armata, Asparagopsis taxiformis, Bonnemaisonia asparagoides, Bonnemaisonia clavata and Bonnemaisonia hamifera) were estimated by image analysis and static microspectrophotometry using the DNA-localizing fluorochrome DAPI (4', 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, dilactate) and the chicken erythrocytes standard. These estimates expand on the Kew database of DNA nuclear content. DNA content values for 1C nuclei in the gametophytes (spermatia and vegetative cells) range from 0.5 pg to 0.8 pg, and for 2C nuclei in the sporophytes or the prostrate phases range from 1.15-1.7 pg. Although only the 2C and 4C values were observed in the sporophyte or the prostrate phase, in the vegetative cells of the gametophyte the values oscillated from 1C to 4C, showing the possible start of endopolyploidy. The results confirm the alternation of nuclear phases in these Bonnemaisoniaceae species, in those that have tetrasporogenesis, as well as those that have somatic meiosis. The availability of a consensus phylogenetic tree for Bonnemaisoniaceae has opened the way to determine evolutionary trends in DNA contents. Both the estimated genome sizes and the published chromosome numbers for Bonnemaisoniaceae suggest a narrow range of values consistent with the conservation of an ancestral genome.
25861932	0	2014	Biotechniques	Comparative analysis of T4 DNA ligases and DNA polymerases used in chromosome conformation capture assays.	Three-dimensional (3-D) genome organization in the nuclear space affects various genomic functions. Circular chromosome conformation capture (4C-seq) is a powerful technique that allows researchers to measure long-range chromosomal interactions with a locus of interest across the entire genome. This method relies on enzymatic cleavage of cross-linked chromatin and consecutive ligation to create ligation junctions between physically adjacent loci, followed by PCR amplification of locus-specific associating loci. The enzymes used must meet 4C standards because variations in their efficiency and performance may affect the quality of the obtained data. Here we systematically compare the efficiency and reliability of different T4 DNA ligases and PCR DNA polymerases, assessing the most critical and technically challenging steps in 4C. The results of this analysis enable the use of cost-effective enzymes with superior specificity and efficiency for 4C and save time in screening for appropriate primers. This information provides users with flexibility in their experimental design and guidelines for adapting and testing any enzyme of choice for obtaining standardized results.
23657480	70	2013	Nat Rev Genet	Exploring the three-dimensional organization of genomes: interpreting chromatin interaction data.	How DNA is organized in three dimensions inside the cell nucleus and how this affects the ways in which cells access, read and interpret genetic information are among the longest standing questions in cell biology. Using newly developed molecular, genomic and computational approaches based on the chromosome conformation capture technology (such as 3C, 4C, 5C and Hi-C), the spatial organization of genomes is being explored at unprecedented resolution. Interpreting the increasingly large chromatin interaction data sets is now posing novel challenges. Here we describe several types of statistical and computational approaches that have recently been developed to analyse chromatin interaction data.
24335803	34	2013	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Cohesin and CTCF differentially affect chromatin architecture and gene expression in human cells.	Recent studies of genome-wide chromatin interactions have revealed that the human genome is partitioned into many self-associating topological domains. The boundary sequences between domains are enriched for binding sites of CTCC-binding factor (CTCF) and the cohesin complex, implicating these two factors in the establishment or maintenance of topological domains. To determine the role of cohesin and CTCF in higher-order chromatin architecture in human cells, we depleted the cohesin complex or CTCF and examined the consequences of loss of these factors on higher-order chromatin organization, as well as the transcriptome. We observed a general loss of local chromatin interactions upon disruption of cohesin, but the topological domains remain intact. However, we found that depletion of CTCF not only reduced intradomain interactions but also increased interdomain interactions. Furthermore, distinct groups of genes become misregulated upon depletion of cohesin and CTCF. Taken together, these observations suggest that CTCF and cohesin contribute differentially to chromatin organization and gene regulation.
23747203	33	2013	Cell Stem Cell	Klf4 organizes long-range chromosomal interactions with the oct4 locus in reprogramming and pluripotency.	Epigenetic mechanisms underlying somatic reprogramming have been extensively studied, but little is known about the nuclear architecture of pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). Using circular chromosome conformation capture with high-throughput sequencing (4C-seq) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), we identified chromosomal regions that colocalize frequently with the Oct4 locus in PSCs. These PSC-specific long-range interactions are established prior to transcriptional activation of endogenous Oct4 during reprogramming to induced PSCs and are facilitated by Klf4-mediated recruitment of cohesin. Depletion of Klf4 leads to unloading of cohesin at the Oct4 enhancer and disrupts long-range interactions prior to loss of Oct4 transcription and subsequent PSC differentiation, suggesting a causative role for Klf4 in facilitating long-range interactions independent of its transcriptional activity. Taken together, our results delineate the basic nuclear organization at the Oct4 locus in PSCs and suggest a functional role for Klf4-mediated higher-order chromatin structure in maintaining and inducing pluripotency.
23411633	17	2013	Nat Protoc	Multiplexed chromosome conformation capture sequencing for rapid genome-scale high-resolution detection of long-range chromatin interactions.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology is a powerful and increasingly popular tool for analyzing the spatial organization of genomes. Several 3C variants have been developed (e.g., 4C, 5C, ChIA-PET, Hi-C), allowing large-scale mapping of long-range genomic interactions. Here we describe multiplexed 3C sequencing (3C-seq), a 4C variant coupled to next-generation sequencing, allowing genome-scale detection of long-range interactions with candidate regions. Compared with several other available techniques, 3C-seq offers a superior resolution (typically single restriction fragment resolution; approximately 1-8 kb on average) and can be applied in a semi-high-throughput fashion. It allows the assessment of long-range interactions of up to 192 genes or regions of interest in parallel by multiplexing library sequencing. This renders multiplexed 3C-seq an inexpensive, quick (total hands-on time of 2 weeks) and efficient method that is ideal for the in-depth analysis of complex genetic loci. The preparation of multiplexed 3C-seq libraries can be performed by any investigator with basic skills in molecular biology techniques. Data analysis requires basic expertise in bioinformatics and in Linux and Python environments. The protocol describes all materials, critical steps and bioinformatics tools required for successful application of 3C-seq technology.
24055367	8	2013	Cell	Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation regulates insulator function and intrachromosomal interactions in Drosophila.	Insulators mediate inter- and intrachromosomal contacts to regulate enhancer-promoter interactions and establish chromosome domains. The mechanisms by which insulator activity can be regulated to orchestrate changes in the function and three-dimensional arrangement of the genome remain elusive. Here, we demonstrate that Drosophila insulator proteins are poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated and that mutation of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (Parp) gene impairs their function. This modification is not essential for DNA occupancy of insulator DNA-binding proteins dCTCF and Su(Hw). However, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of K566 in CP190 promotes protein-protein interactions with other insulator proteins, association with the nuclear lamina, and insulator activity in vivo. Consistent with these findings, the nuclear clustering of CP190 complexes is disrupted in Parp mutant cells. Importantly, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation facilitates intrachromosomal interactions between insulator sites measured by 4C. These data suggest that the role of insulators in organizing the three-dimensional architecture of the genome may be modulated by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation.
23825666	6	2013	PLoS One	Evolutionary dynamics of the accessory genome of Listeria monocytogenes.	Listeria monocytogenes, a foodborne bacterial pathogen, is comprised of four phylogenetic lineages that vary with regard to their serotypes and distribution among sources. In order to characterize lineage-specific genomic diversity within L. monocytogenes, we sequenced the genomes of eight strains from several lineages and serotypes, and characterized the accessory genome, which was hypothesized to contribute to phenotypic differences across lineages. The eight L. monocytogenes genomes sequenced range in size from 2.85-3.14 Mb, encode 2,822-3,187 genes, and include the first publicly available sequenced representatives of serotypes 1/2c, 3a and 4c. Mapping of the distribution of accessory genes revealed two distinct regions of the L. monocytogenes chromosome: an accessory-rich region in the first 65° adjacent to the origin of replication and a more stable region in the remaining 295°. This pattern of genome organization is distinct from that of related bacteria Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus. The accessory genome of all lineages is enriched for cell surface-related genes and phosphotransferase systems, and transcriptional regulators, highlighting the selective pressures faced by contemporary strains from their hosts, other microbes, and their environment. Phylogenetic analysis of O-antigen genes and gene clusters predicts that serotype 4 was ancestral in L. monocytogenes and serotype 1/2 associated gene clusters were putatively introduced through horizontal gene transfer in the ancestral population of L. monocytogenes lineage I and II.
24019942	5	2013	PLoS One	Genomic interaction profiles in breast cancer reveal altered chromatin architecture.	Gene transcription can be regulated by remote enhancer regions through chromosome looping either in cis or in trans. Cancer cells are characterized by wholesale changes in long-range gene interactions, but the role that these long-range interactions play in cancer progression and metastasis is not well understood. In this study, we used IGFBP3, a gene involved in breast cancer pathogenesis, as bait in a 4C-seq experiment comparing normal breast cells (HMEC) with two breast cancer cell lines (MCF7, an ER positive cell line, and MDA-MB-231, a triple negative cell line). The IGFBP3 long-range interaction profile was substantially altered in breast cancer. Many interactions seen in normal breast cells are lost and novel interactions appear in cancer lines. We found that in HMEC, the breast carcinoma amplified sequence gene family (BCAS) 1-4 were among the top 10 most significantly enriched regions of interaction with IGFBP3. 3D-FISH analysis indicated that the translocation-prone BCAS genes, which are located on chromosomes 1, 17, and 20, are in close physical proximity with IGFBP3 and each other in normal breast cells. We also found that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a gene implicated in tumorigenesis, interacts significantly with IGFBP3 and that this interaction may play a role in their regulation. Breakpoint analysis suggests that when an IGFBP3 interacting region undergoes a translocation an additional interaction detectable by 4C is gained. Overall, our data from multiple lines of evidence suggest an important role for long-range chromosomal interactions in the pathogenesis of cancer.
24265791	3	2013	PLoS One	Structural variation-associated expression changes are paralleled by chromatin architecture modifications.	Copy number variants (CNVs) influence the expression of genes that map not only within the rearrangement, but also to its flanks. To assess the possible mechanism(s) underlying this &quot;neighboring effect&quot;, we compared intrachromosomal interactions and histone modifications in cell lines of patients affected by genomic disorders and control individuals. Using chromosome conformation capture (4C-seq), we observed that a set of genes flanking the Williams-Beuren Syndrome critical region (WBSCR) were often looping together. The newly identified interacting genes include AUTS2, mutations of which are associated with autism and intellectual disabilities. Deletion of the WBSCR disrupts the expression of this group of flanking genes, as well as long-range interactions between them and the rearranged interval. We also pinpointed concomitant changes in histone modifications between samples. We conclude that large genomic rearrangements can lead to chromatin conformation changes that extend far away from the structural variant, thereby possibly modulating expression globally and modifying the phenotype.</AbstractText>: Copy number variants (CNVs) influence the expression of genes that map not only within the rearrangement, but also to its flanks. To assess the possible mechanism(s) underlying this &quot;neighboring effect&quot;, we compared intrachromosomal interactions and histone modifications in cell lines of patients affected by genomic disorders and control individuals. Using chromosome conformation capture (4C-seq), we observed that a set of genes flanking the Williams-Beuren Syndrome critical region (WBSCR) were often looping together. The newly identified interacting genes include AUTS2, mutations of which are associated with autism and intellectual disabilities. Deletion of the WBSCR disrupts the expression of this group of flanking genes, as well as long-range interactions between them and the rearranged interval. We also pinpointed concomitant changes in histone modifications between samples. We conclude that large genomic rearrangements can lead to chromatin conformation changes that extend far away from the structural variant, thereby possibly modulating expression globally and modifying the phenotype.GEO SERIES ACCESSION NUMBER: GSE33784, GSE33867.
24014450	3	2013	Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol	Chromatin looping and organization at developmentally regulated gene loci.	Developmentally regulated genes are often controlled by distant enhancers, silencers and insulators, to implement their correct transcriptional programs. In recent years, the development of 3C and derived techniques (4C, 5C, HiC, ChIA-PET, etc.) has confirmed that chromatin looping is an important mechanism for the transfer of regulatory information in mammalian cells. At many developmentally regulated gene loci, transcriptional activation is indeed accompanied by the formation of chromatin loops between genes and distant enhancers. Similarly, dynamic looping between insulator elements and changes in local 3D organization may be observed upon variation in transcriptional activity. Chromatin looping also occurs at silent gene loci, where its function remains less understood. In lineage-committed cells, partial 3D configurations are detected at loci that are activated at later stages. However, these partial configurations usually lack promoter-enhancer loops that accompany transcriptional activation, suggesting they have structural functions. Definitive evidence for a repressive role of chromatin looping is still lacking. Chromatin loops have been reported at repressed loci but, alternatively, they may act as a distraction for active loops. Together, these mechanisms allow fine-tuning of regulatory programs, thus providing further diversity in the transcriptional control of developmentally regulated gene loci.
23748562	3	2013	Nucleic Acids Res	Allelic exclusion of the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus is independent of its nuclear localization in mature B cells.	In developing B cells, the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) locus is thought to move from repressive to permissive chromatin compartments to facilitate its scheduled rearrangement. In mature B cells, maintenance of allelic exclusion has been proposed to involve recruitment of the non-productive IgH allele to pericentromeric heterochromatin. Here, we used an allele-specific chromosome conformation capture combined with sequencing (4C-seq) approach to unambigously follow the individual IgH alleles in mature B lymphocytes. Despite their physical and functional difference, productive and non-productive IgH alleles in B cells and unrearranged IgH alleles in T cells share many chromosomal contacts and largely reside in active chromatin. In brain, however, the locus resides in a different repressive environment. We conclude that IgH adopts a lymphoid-specific nuclear location that is, however, unrelated to maintenance of allelic exclusion. We additionally find that in mature B cells-but not in T cells-the distal VH regions of both IgH alleles position themselves away from active chromatin. This, we speculate, may help to restrict enhancer activity to the productively rearranged VH promoter element.
24254229	2	2013	Chromosome Res	Chromosome conformation capture-on-chip analysis of long-range cis-interactions of the SOX9 promoter.	Evolutionarily conserved transcription factor SOX9 is essential for the differentiation of chondrocytes and the development of testes. Heterozygous point mutations and genomic deletions involving SOX9 lead to campomelic dysplasia (CD), a skeletal malformation syndrome often associated with sex reversal. Chromosomal rearrangements with breakpoints mapping up to 1.6 Mb up- and downstream to SOX9, and likely disrupting its distant cis-regulatory elements, have been described in patients with milder forms of CD. Based on the location of these aberration breakpoints, four clusters upstream of SOX9 have been defined. Interestingly, we found that each of these intervals overlaps a gene encoding long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), suggesting that lncRNAs may contribute to long-range regulation of SOX9 expression. One of the four upstream regions, RevSex (517-595 kb 5' to SOX9), is associated with sex reversal, and was suggested to harbor a testis-specific and sex-determining enhancer. Another sex-determining interval was mapped to a gene desert &gt;1.3 Mb downstream of SOX9. We have performed chromosome conformation capture-on-chip (4C) analysis in Sertoli cells and lymphoblasts to verify the proposed long-range interactions of the SOX9 promoter and to identify potential novel regulatory elements that might be responsible for sex reversal in patients with CD. We identified several novel potentially cis-interacting regions both up- and downstream to SOX9, with some of them overlapping lncRNA genes. Our data point to lncRNAs as likely mediators of some of these regulatory interactions.
23705979	2	2013	BMC Genomics	Comparative analysis of 4C-Seq data generated from enzyme-based and sonication-based methods.	BACKGROUND: Circular chromosome conformation capture, when coupled with next-generation sequencing (4C-Seq), can be used to identify genome-wide interaction of a given locus (a &quot;bait&quot; sequence) with all of its interacting partners. Conventional 4C approaches used restriction enzyme digestion to fragment chromatin, and recently sonication approach was also applied for this purpose. However, bioinformatics pipelines for analyzing sonication-based 4C-Seq data are not well developed. In addition, data consistency as well as similarity between the two methods has not been explored previously. Here we present a comparative analysis of 4C-Seq data generated by both methods, using an enhancer element of Pou5f1 gene in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.RESULTS: From biological replicates, we found good correlation (r&gt;0.6) for inter-chromosomal interactions identified in either enzyme or sonication method. Compared to enzyme approach, sonication method generated less distal intra-chromosomal interactions, possibly due to the difference in chromatin fragmentation. From all mapped interactions, we further applied statistical models to identify enriched interacting regions. Interestingly, data generated from the two methods showed 30% overlap of the reproducible interacting regions. The interacting sites in the reproducible regions from both methods are similarly enriched with active histone marks. In addition, the interacting sites identified from sonication-based data are enriched with ChIP-Seq signals of transcription factors Oct4, Klf4, Esrrb, Tcfcp2i1, and Zfx that are critical for reprogramming and pluripotency.CONCLUSIONS: Both enzyme-based and sonication-based 4C-Seq methods are valuable tools to explore long-range chromosomal interactions. Due to the nature of sonication-based method, correlation analysis of the 4C interactions with transcription factor binding should be more straightforward.
23650635	1	2013	Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci	High-resolution analysis of cis-acting regulatory networks at the α-globin locus.	We have combined the circular chromosome conformation capture protocol with high-throughput, genome-wide sequence analysis to characterize the cis-acting regulatory network at a single locus. In contrast to methods which identify large interacting regions (10-1000 kb), the 4C approach provides a comprehensive, high-resolution analysis of a specific locus with the aim of defining, in detail, the cis-regulatory elements controlling a single gene or gene cluster. Using the human α-globin locus as a model, we detected all known local and long-range interactions with this gene cluster. In addition, we identified two interactions with genes located 300 kb (NME4) and 625 kb (FAM173a) from the α-globin cluster.
23337102	1	2013	J Reprod Dev	Valproic acid treatment from the 4-cell stage improves Oct4 expression and nuclear distribution of histone H3K27me3 in mouse cloned blastocysts.	We examined effects of treatment with valproic acid (0, 0.2, 1 or 2 mM, VPA), an inhibitor of class I and IIa histone deacetylases (HDACs), of mouse somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) embryos for 24 h from 48 h (4-cell stage), 24 h (2-cell stage) or immediately after oocyte activation on blastocyst formation rates and qualities of the resultant blastocysts. Blastocyst formation rates (33.4-37.0%) were not improved by VPA treatments compared with the untreated control (35.1-36.4%). However, immunofluorescence staining revealed that Oct4 expression levels, evaluated from percentages of embryos expressing Oct4 strongly and having more than 10 Oct4-positive cells, in blastocysts from SCNT embryos treated with 1 mM VPA for 24 h from the 4-cell stage (VPA-4C) were highest among all the groups and that the proportion of cells with a normal nuclear distribution of histone H3 trimethylated at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), a marker of the state of X-chromosome inactivation, significantly increased in the VPA-4C group (36.6%) compared with the control group (12.4%, P&lt;0.05). Treatments with scriptaid and sodium butyrate, inhibitors of class I and IIa/b HDACs, for 24 h from the 4-cell stage also had beneficial effects on SCNT blastocysts. These findings indicate that treatment with 1 mM VPA from the 4-cell stage improves the Oct4 expression and nuclear distribution of H3K27me3 in mouse SCNT blastocysts and suggest that the inhibition of class I and IIa HDACs from the 4-cell stage plays an important role in these effects.
23611285	0	2013	Adv Immunol	Translocations in normal B cells and cancers: insights from new technical approaches.	Chromosomal translocations are recurrent genetic events that define many types of cancers. Since their first description several decades ago as defining elements in cancer cells, our understanding of the mechanisms that determine their formation as well as their implications for cancer progression and therapy has remarkably progressed. Chromosomal translocations originate from double-strand breaks (DSBs) that are brought into proximity in the nuclear space and joined inappropriately by DNA-repair pathways. The frequency and pattern of translocations are influenced by perturbations of any of these events. DSB formation is heavily determined by physiologic processes, such as the activity of RAG1/2 and AID enzymes during B-cell development or maturation, or by pathologic factors, such as ionizing radiations, ROS, or fragile sites. Cellular processes of mRNA transcription, DNA replication, and repair can influence the chromosomal territories and modify the relative position and proximity of genes inside the nucleus. DNA-repair factors contribute not only to the maintenance of genome integrity but also to translocations in normal and cancer cells. Next-generation sequencing techniques provide an unprecedented and powerful tool to approach the field of chromosomal translocations. Using specific examples, we will explain how genome-wide translocation mapping methods, such as high-throughput genomic translocation sequencing (HTGTS) and translocation-capture sequencing, combined with large-scale methods to determine nuclear proximity of genes or chromosome domains, such as 4C and Hi-C, have changed our view of the factors and the rules governing translocation formation in noncancer cells. Finally, we will review chromosomal rearrangements and newly described findings, such as chromothripsis, in cancer cells based on these novel rules on translocation formation.
22215806	106	2012	Genes Dev	A decade of 3C technologies: insights into nuclear organization.	Over the past 10 years, the development of chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology and the subsequent genomic variants thereof have enabled the analysis of nuclear organization at an unprecedented resolution and throughput. The technology relies on the original and, in hindsight, remarkably simple idea that digestion and religation of fixed chromatin in cells, followed by the quantification of ligation junctions, allows for the determination of DNA contact frequencies and insight into chromosome topology. Here we evaluate and compare the current 3C-based methods (including 4C [chromosome conformation capture-on-chip], 5C [chromosome conformation capture carbon copy], HiC, and ChIA-PET), summarize their contribution to our current understanding of genome structure, and discuss how shape influences genome function.
22422861	35	2012	Science	ESCRT-III governs the Aurora B-mediated abscission checkpoint through CHMP4C.	The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery plays an evolutionarily conserved role in cytokinetic abscission, the final step of cell division where daughter cells are physically separated. Here, we show that charged multivesicular body (MVB) protein 4C (CHMP4C), a human ESCRT-III subunit, is involved in abscission timing. This function correlated with its differential spatiotemporal distribution during late stages of cytokinesis. Accordingly, CHMP4C functioned in the Aurora B-dependent abscission checkpoint to prevent both premature resolution of intercellular chromosome bridges and accumulation of DNA damage. CHMP4C engaged the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC) via interaction with Borealin, which suggested a model whereby CHMP4C inhibits abscission upon phosphorylation by Aurora B. Thus, the ESCRT machinery may protect against genetic damage by coordinating midbody resolution with the abscission checkpoint.
22961246	28	2012	Nat Methods	Robust 4C-seq data analysis to screen for regulatory DNA interactions.	Regulatory DNA elements can control the expression of distant genes via physical interactions. Here we present a cost-effective methodology and computational analysis pipeline for robust characterization of the physical organization around selected promoters and other functional elements using chromosome conformation capture combined with high-throughput sequencing (4C-seq). Our approach can be multiplexed and routinely integrated with other functional genomics assays to facilitate physical characterization of gene regulation.
22609568	24	2012	Methods	Determining long-range chromatin interactions for selected genomic sites using 4C-seq technology: from fixation to computation.	Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C) and 3C-based technologies are constantly evolving in order to probe nuclear organization with higher depth and resolution. One such method is 4C-technology that allows the investigation of the nuclear environment of a locus of choice. The use of Illumina next generation sequencing as a detection platform for the analysis of 4C data has further improved the sensitivity and resolution of this method. Here we provide a step-by-step protocol for 4C-seq, describing the procedure from the initial template preparation until the final data analysis, interchanged with background information and considerations.
23103767	17	2012	EMBO J	TNFα signals through specialized factories where responsive coding and miRNA genes are transcribed.	Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) is a potent cytokine that signals through nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) to activate a subset of human genes. It is usually assumed that this involves RNA polymerases transcribing responsive genes wherever they might be in the nucleus. Using primary human endothelial cells, variants of chromosome conformation capture (including 4C and chromatin interaction analysis with paired-end tag sequencing), and fluorescence in situ hybridization to detect single nascent transcripts, we show that TNFα induces responsive genes to congregate in discrete 'NFκB factories'. Some factories further specialize in transcribing responsive genes encoding micro-RNAs that target downregulated mRNAs. We expect all signalling pathways to contain this extra leg, where responding genes are transcribed in analogous specialized factories.
22807480	16	2012	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Chromatin-interaction compartment switch at developmentally regulated chromosomal domains reveals an unusual principle of chromatin folding.	Several 400- to 800-kb murine chromosome domains switch from early to late replication during loss of pluripotency, accompanied by a stable form of gene silencing that is resistant to reprogramming. We found that, whereas enhanced nuclease accessibility correlated with early replication genome-wide, domains that switch replication timing during differentiation were exceptionally inaccessible even when early-replicating. Nonetheless, two domains studied in detail exhibited substantial changes in transcriptional activity and higher-order chromatin unfolding confined to the region of replication timing change. Chromosome conformation capture (4C) data revealed that in the unfolded state in embryonic stem cells, these domains interacted preferentially with the early-replicating chromatin compartment, rarely interacting even with flanking late-replicating domains, whereas after differentiation, these same domains preferentially associated with late-replicating chromatin, including flanking domains. In both configurations they retained local boundaries of self-interaction, supporting the replication domain model of replication-timing regulation. Our results reveal a principle of developmentally regulated, large-scale chromosome folding involving a subnuclear compartment switch of inaccessible chromatin. This unusual level of regulation may underlie resistance to reprogramming in replication-timing switch regions.
22802932	12	2012	PLoS One	Pairing of homologous regions in the mouse genome is associated with transcription but not imprinting status.	Although somatic homologous pairing is common in Drosophila it is not generally observed in mammalian cells. However, a number of regions have recently been shown to come into close proximity with their homologous allele, and it has been proposed that pairing might be involved in the establishment or maintenance of monoallelic expression. Here, we investigate the pairing properties of various imprinted and non-imprinted regions in mouse tissues and ES cells. We find by allele-specific 4C-Seq and DNA FISH that the Kcnq1 imprinted region displays frequent pairing but that this is not dependent on monoallelic expression. We demonstrate that pairing involves larger chromosomal regions and that the two chromosome territories come close together. Frequent pairing is not associated with imprinted status or DNA repair, but is influenced by chromosomal location and transcription. We propose that homologous pairing is not exclusive to specialised regions or specific functional events, and speculate that it provides the cell with the opportunity of trans-allelic effects on gene regulation.
22929766	8	2012	Methods Enzymol	4C technology: protocols and data analysis.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology and its genome-wide derivatives have revolutionized our knowledge on chromatin folding and nuclear organization. 4C-seq Technology combines 3C principles with high-throughput sequencing (4C-seq) to enable for unbiased genome-wide screens for DNA contacts made by single genomic sites of interest. Here, we discuss in detail the design, application, and data analysis of 4C-seq experiments. Based on many hundreds of different 4C-seq experiments, we define criteria to assess data quality and show how different restriction enzymes and cross-linking conditions affect results. We describe in detail the mapping strategy of 4C-seq reads and show advanced strategies for data analysis.
22476443	5	2012	Chromosoma	Interphase chromatin organisation in Arabidopsis nuclei: constraints versus randomness.	The spatial chromatin organisation and molecular interactions within and between chromatin domains and chromosome territories (CTs) are essential for fundamental processes such as replication, transcription and DNA repair via homologous recombination. To analyse the distribution and interaction of whole CTs, centromeres, (sub)telomeres and ~100-kb interstitial chromatin segments in endopolyploid nuclei, specific FISH probes from Arabidopsis thaliana were applied to 2-64C differentiated leaf nuclei. Whereas CTs occupy a distinct and defined volume of the nucleus and do not obviously intermingle with each other in 2-64C nuclei, ~100-kb sister chromatin segments within these CTs become more non-cohesive with increasing endopolyploidy. Centromeres, preferentially located at the nuclear periphery, may show ring- or half-moon like shapes in 2C and 4C nuclei. Sister centromeres tend to associate up to the 8C level. From 16C nuclei on, they become progressively separated. The higher the polyploidy level gets, the more separate chromatids are present. Due to sister chromatid separation in highly endopolyploid nuclei, the centromeric histone variant CENH3, the 180-bp centromeric repeats and pericentromeric heterochromatin form distinct subdomains at adjacent but not intermingling positions. The (sub)telomeres are frequently associated with each other and with the nucleolus and less often with centromeres. The extent of chromatid separation and of chromatin decondensation at subtelomeric chromatin segments varies between chromosome arms. A mainly random distribution and similar shapes of CTs even at higher ploidy levels indicate that in general no substantial CT reorganisation occurs during endopolyploidisation. Non-cohesive sister chromatid regions at chromosome arms and at the (peri)centromere are accompanied by a less dense chromatin conformation in highly endopolyploid nuclei. We discuss the possible function of this conformation in comparison to transcriptionally active regions at insect polytene chromosomes.
22347474	5	2012	PLoS One	CTCF mediates the cell-type specific spatial organization of the Kcnq5 locus and the local gene regulation.	Chromatin loops play important roles in the dynamic spatial organization of genes in the nucleus. Growing evidence has revealed that the multivalent functional zinc finger protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a master regulator of genome spatial organization, and mediates the ubiquitous chromatin loops within the genome. Using circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) methodology, we discovered that CTCF may be a master organizer in mediating the spatial organization of the kcnq5 gene locus. We characterized the cell-type specific spatial organization of the kcnq5 gene locus mediated by CTCF in detail using chromosome conformation capture (3C) and 3C-derived techniques. Cohesion also participated in mediating the organization of this locus. RNAi-mediated knockdown of CTCF sharply diminished the interaction frequencies between the chromatin loops of the kcnq5 gene locus and down-regulated local gene expression. Functional analysis showed that the interacting chromatin loops of the kcnq5 gene locus can repress the gene expression in a luciferase reporter assay. These interacting chromatin fragments were a series of repressing elements whose contacts were mediated by CTCF. Therefore, these findings suggested that the dynamical spatial organization of the kcnq5 locus regulates local gene expression.
22776363	4	2012	Methods	A genome-wide 3C-method for characterizing the three-dimensional architectures of genomes.	Accumulating evidence demonstrates that the three-dimensional (3D) organization of chromosomes within the eukaryotic nucleus reflects and influences genomic activities, including transcription, DNA replication, recombination and DNA repair. In order to uncover structure-function relationships, it is necessary first to understand the principles underlying the folding and the 3D arrangement of chromosomes. Chromosome conformation capture (3C) provides a powerful tool for detecting interactions within and between chromosomes. A high throughput derivative of 3C, chromosome conformation capture on chip (4C), executes a genome-wide interrogation of interaction partners for a given locus. We recently developed a new method, a derivative of 3C and 4C, which, similar to Hi-C, is capable of comprehensively identifying long-range chromosome interactions throughout a genome in an unbiased fashion. Hence, our method can be applied to decipher the 3D architectures of genomes. Here, we provide a detailed protocol for this method.
22722369	4	2012	Nat Protoc	Sensitive detection of chromatin coassociations using enhanced chromosome conformation capture on chip.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) is a powerful technique for analyzing spatial chromatin organization in vivo. Technical variants of the assay ('4C') allow the systematic detection of genome-wide coassociations with bait sequences of interest, enabling the nuclear environments of specific genes to be probed. We describe enhanced 4C (e4C, enhanced chromosome conformation capture on chip), a technique incorporating additional enrichment steps for bait-specific sequences, and thus improving sensitivity in the detection of weaker, distal chromatin coassociations. In brief, e4C entails the fixation, restriction digestion and ligation steps of conventional 3C, with an optional chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) step to select for subsets of chromatin coassociations, followed by bait enrichment by biotinylated primer extension and pull-down, adapter ligation and PCR amplification. Chromatin coassociations with the bait sequence can then be assessed by hybridizing e4C products to microarrays or sequencing. The e4C procedure takes approximately 1 week to go from tissue to DNA ready for microarray hybridization.
22877079	0	2012	J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med	Endoreduplication in cervical trophoblast cells from normal pregnancies.	OBJECTIVE: Fetal cells represented by extravillous trophoblasts (EVT) obtained from the cervix by a minimally invasive procedure are important for prenatal diagnosis in early pregnancies. Endoreduplication is a duplication of chromosomes without mitosis, leading to polyploidy that might represent increased cellular metabolic activity. In this study, we estimated the normal prevalence of polyploid trophoblasts exfoliated to the cervix between 5 and 13 weeks of gestation.METHODS: Cervical samples were obtained by cytobrush, between 5 and 13 weeks of gestation from 36 randomly selected, singleton pregnancies. FISH was done with X, Y and two 21 probes.RESULTS: We diagnosed 21 pregnancies with female and 15 pregnancies with male fetal karyotypes. A mean of 15.2 (0.02%) tetraploid cells were found in pregnancies with a female fetus and a mean of 2.0 (0.003%) tetraploid cells were found in pregnancies with a male fetus. The tetraploid cells (endoreduplicated trophoblasts) were two to three times larger than the normal cells usually seen in the cervix.CONCLUSIONS: Extravillus trophoblasts tend to form endoreduplication to the ploidy level of 4c-8c of DNA. Those cells may represent a typical phenomenon in the growing placenta. Extravillus trophoblasts from female fetuses tend to form higher rates of endoreduplication.
22777752	0	2012	J Biochem Mol Toxicol	In vivo antigenotoxic potential and possible mechanism of action of selected 4-hydroxy-2H-chromen-2-one derivatives.	The in vivo sex-linked recessive lethal test was carried out in Drosophila melanogaster to investigate whether or not five substituted 4-hydroxy-2H-chromen-2-ones can modulate the genotoxicity of the well-established mutagenic agent ethyl methanesulfonate (EMS). For this purpose, 3 days old Canton S males were treated with the potent mutagen EMS alone in concentration of 0.75 ppm, as well as in combination with one of the five 4-hydroxycoumarins, namely diethyl 2-(1-(4-hydroxy-2-oxo-2H-chromen-3-yl)ethylidene)malonate (2b), 3-(1-(4-hydroxy-2-oxo-2H-chromen-3-yl)ethylidene)pentane-2,4-dione (6b), 4-(4-(4-hydroxy-2-oxo-2H-chromen-3-yl)thiazol-2-ylamino) benzenesulfonic acid (4c), 4-hydroxy-3-(2-(2-nitropheny lamino)thiazol-4-yl)-2H-chromen-2-one (9c), and (E)-4-hydroxy-3-(1-(m-tolylimino)ethyl)-2H-chromen-2-one (5d), in concentration of 70 ppm. The frequency of germinative mutations increased significantly after the treatment with EMS and decreased after treatments with coumarins. The maximum reduction was observed after treatments with 2b, 6b, 4c, and 5d. By the formation of hydrogen bonds or electrostatic interactions with O(6) of DNA guanine, tested coumarins prevent EMS-induced alkylation. The results indicate a protective role of five 4-hydroxycoumarins under the action of a strong mutagen.
22701699	0	2012	PLoS One	Dynamics of endoreplication during Drosophila posterior scutellar macrochaete development.	Endoreplication is a variant type of DNA replication, consisting only of alternating G1 and S phases. Many types of Drosophila tissues undergo endoreplication. However, the timing and the extent to which a single endocycling macrochaete undergoes temporally programmed endoreplication during development are unclear. Here, we focused on the dynamics of endoreplication during posterior scutellar (pSC) macrochaete development. Quantitative analyses of C values in shaft cells and socket cells revealed a gradual rise from 8C and 4C at 8 hours after pupal formation (APF) to 72C and 24C at 29 hours APF, respectively. The validity of the values was further confirmed by the measurement of DNA content with a confocal laser microscope. BrdU incorporation assays demonstrated that shaft cells undergo four rounds of endoreplication from 18 to 29.5 hours APF. In contrast, socket cells undergo two rounds of endoreplication during the same period. Statistical analyses showed that the theoretical C values, based on BrdU assays, nearly coincide with the actually measured C values in socket cells, but not in shaft cells after 22 hours APF. These analyses suggest that socket cells undergo two rounds of endoreplication. However, the mechanism of endoreplication in the shaft cells may change from 22 hours APF, suggesting the possibility that shaft cells undergo two or four rounds of endoreplication during the periods. We also found that the timing of endoreplication differs, depending on the type of macrochaete. Moreover, endocycling in shaft cells of both the left and right sides of pSC bristle lineages occurs in the same pattern, indicating that the process is synchronized for specific types of macrochaete. Our findings suggest that endocycling in macrochaete cell lineages can be a model for understanding mechanisms of endoreplication at the single-cell level.
22525789	0	2012	Methods	Chromosome conformation capture on chip in single Drosophila melanogaster tissues.	Chromosomes are protein-DNA complexes that encode life. In a cell nucleus, chromosomes are folded in a highly specific manner, which connects strongly to some of their paramount functions, such as DNA replication and gene transcription. Chromosome conformation capture methodologies allow researchers to detect chromosome folding, by quantitatively measuring which genomic sequences are in close proximity in nuclear space. Here, we describe a modified chromosome conformation capture on chip (4C) protocol, which is specifically designed for detection of chromosome folding in a single Drosophila melanogaster tissue. Our protocol enables 4C analyses on a limited number of cells, which is crucial for fly tissues, because these contain relatively low numbers of cells. We used this protocol to demonstrate that target genes of Polycomb group proteins interact with each other in nuclear space of third instar larval brain cells. Major benefits of using D. melanogaster in 4C studies are: (1) powerful and tractable genetic approaches can be incorporated; (2) short generation time allows use of complex genotypes; and (3) compact and well annotated genome. We anticipate that our sensitized 4C method will be generally applicable to detect chromosome folding in other fly tissues.
21690198	61	2011	Genes Dev	The inactive X chromosome adopts a unique three-dimensional conformation that is dependent on Xist RNA.	Three-dimensional topology of DNA in the cell nucleus provides a level of transcription regulation beyond the sequence of the linear DNA. To study the relationship between the transcriptional activity and the spatial environment of a gene, we used allele-specific chromosome conformation capture-on-chip (4C) technology to produce high-resolution topology maps of the active and inactive X chromosomes in female cells. We found that loci on the active X form multiple long-range interactions, with spatial segregation of active and inactive chromatin. On the inactive X, silenced loci lack preferred interactions, suggesting a unique random organization inside the inactive territory. However, escapees, among which is Xist, are engaged in long-range contacts with each other, enabling identification of novel escapees. Deletion of Xist results in partial refolding of the inactive X into a conformation resembling the active X without affecting gene silencing or DNA methylation. Our data point to a role for Xist RNA in shaping the conformation of the inactive X chromosome at least partially independent of transcription.
21481790	42	2011	Cancer Cell	Integrated transcript and genome analyses reveal NKX2-1 and MEF2C as potential oncogenes in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.	To identify oncogenic pathways in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), we combined expression profiling of 117 pediatric patient samples and detailed molecular-cytogenetic analyses including the Chromosome Conformation Capture on Chip (4C) method. Two T-ALL subtypes were identified that lacked rearrangements of known oncogenes. One subtype associated with cortical arrest, expression of cell cycle genes, and ectopic NKX2-1 or NKX2-2 expression for which rearrangements were identified. The second subtype associated with immature T cell development and high expression of the MEF2C transcription factor as consequence of rearrangements of MEF2C, transcription factors that target MEF2C, or MEF2C-associated cofactors. We propose NKX2-1, NKX2-2, and MEF2C as T-ALL oncogenes that are activated by various rearrangements.
21471403	35	2011	Genome Res	Diverse gene reprogramming events occur in the same spatial clusters of distal regulatory elements.	The spatial organization of genes in the interphase nucleus plays an important role in establishment and regulation of gene expression. Contradicting results have been reported to date, with little consensus about the dynamics of nuclear organization and the features of the contact loci. In this study, we investigated the properties and dynamics of genomic loci that are in contact with glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-responsive loci. We took a systematic approach, combining genome-wide interaction profiling by the chromosome conformation capture on chip (4C) technology with expression, protein occupancy, and chromatin accessibility profiles. This approach allowed a comprehensive analysis of how distinct features of the linear genome are organized in the three-dimensional nuclear space in the context of rapid gene regulation. We found that the transcriptional response to GR occurs without dramatic nuclear reorganization. Moreover, contrary to the view of transcription-driven organization, even genes with opposite transcriptional responses colocalize. Regions contacting GR-regulated genes are not particularly enriched for GR-regulated loci or for any functional group of genes, suggesting that these subnuclear environments are not organized to respond to a specific factor. The contact regions are, however, highly enriched for DNase I-hypersensitive sites that comprehensively mark cell-type-specific regulatory sites. These findings indicate that the nucleus is pre-organized in a conformation allowing rapid transcriptional reprogramming, and this organization is significantly correlated with cell-type-specific chromatin sites accessible to regulatory factors. Numerous open chromatin loci may be arranged in nuclear domains that are poised to respond to diverse signals in general and to permit efficient gene regulation.
21455484	34	2011	PLoS Genet	Interactions among Polycomb domains are guided by chromosome architecture.	Polycomb group (PcG) proteins bind and regulate hundreds of genes. Previous evidence has suggested that long-range chromatin interactions may contribute to the regulation of PcG target genes. Here, we adapted the Chromosome Conformation Capture on Chip (4C) assay to systematically map chromosomal interactions in Drosophila melanogaster larval brain tissue. Our results demonstrate that PcG target genes interact extensively with each other in nuclear space. These interactions are highly specific for PcG target genes, because non-target genes with either low or high expression show distinct interactions. Notably, interactions are mostly limited to genes on the same chromosome arm, and we demonstrate that a topological rather than a sequence-based mechanism is responsible for this constraint. Our results demonstrate that many interactions among PcG target genes exist and that these interactions are guided by overall chromosome architecture.
22085927	30	2011	EMBO J	Human tRNA genes function as chromatin insulators.	Insulators help separate active chromatin domains from silenced ones. In yeast, gene promoters act as insulators to block the spread of Sir and HP1 mediated silencing while in metazoans most insulators are multipartite autonomous entities. tDNAs are repetitive sequences dispersed throughout the human genome and we now show that some of these tDNAs can function as insulators in human cells. Using computational methods, we identified putative human tDNA insulators. Using silencer blocking, transgene protection and repressor blocking assays we show that some of these tDNA-containing fragments can function as barrier insulators in human cells. We find that these elements also have the ability to block enhancers from activating RNA pol II transcribed promoters. Characterization of a putative tDNA insulator in human cells reveals that the site possesses chromatin signatures similar to those observed at other better-characterized eukaryotic insulators. Enhanced 4C analysis demonstrates that the tDNA insulator makes long-range chromatin contacts with other tDNAs and ETC sites but not with intervening or flanking RNA pol II transcribed genes.
21840925	22	2011	Hum Mol Genet	15q11.2-13.3 chromatin analysis reveals epigenetic regulation of CHRNA7 with deficiencies in Rett and autism brain.	Copy number variations (CNVs) within human 15q11.2-13.3 show reduced penetrance and variable expressivity in a range of neurologic disorders. Therefore, characterizing 15q11.2-13.3 chromatin structure is important for understanding the regulation of this locus during normal neuronal development. Deletion of the Prader-Willi imprinting center (PWS-IC) within 15q11.2-13.3 disrupts long-range imprinted gene expression resulting in Prader-Willi syndrome. Previous results establish that MeCP2 binds to the PWS-IC and is required for optimal expression of distal GABRB3 and UBE3A. To examine the hypothesis that MeCP2 facilitates 15q11.2-13.3 transcription by linking the PWS-IC with distant elements, chromosome capture conformation on chip (4C) analysis was performed in human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. SH-SY5Y neurons had 2.84-fold fewer 15q11.2-13.3 PWS-IC chromatin interactions than undifferentiated SH-SY5Y neuroblasts, revealing developmental chromatin de-condensation of the locus. Out of 68 PWS-IC interactions with15q11.2-13.3 identified by 4C analysis and 62 15q11.2-13.3 MeCP2-binding sites identified by previous ChIP-chip studies, only five sites showed overlap. Remarkably, two of these overlapping PWS-IC- and MeCP2-bound sites mapped to sites flanking CHRNA7 (cholinergic receptor nicotinic alpha 7) encoding the cholinergic receptor, nicotinic, alpha 7. PWS-IC interaction with CHRNA7 in neurons was independently confirmed by fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis. Subsequent quantitative transcriptional analyses of frontal cortex from Rett syndrome and autism patients revealed significantly reduced CHRNA7 expression compared with controls. Together, these results suggest that transcription of CHRNA7 is modulated by chromatin interactions with the PWS-IC. Thus, loss of long-range chromatin interactions within 15q11.2-13.3 may contribute to multiple human neurodevelopmental disorders.
21206754	10	2011	PLoS One	A systematic enhancer screen using lentivector transgenesis identifies conserved and non-conserved functional elements at the Olig1 and Olig2 locus.	Finding sequences that control expression of genes is central to understanding genome function. Previous studies have used evolutionary conservation as an indicator of regulatory potential. Here, we present a method for the unbiased in vivo screen of putative enhancers in large DNA regions, using the mouse as a model. We cloned a library of 142 overlapping fragments from a 200 kb-long murine BAC in a lentiviral vector expressing LacZ from a minimal promoter, and used the resulting vectors to infect fertilized murine oocytes. LacZ staining of E11 embryos obtained by first using the vectors in pools and then testing individual candidates led to the identification of 3 enhancers, only one of which shows significant evolutionary conservation. In situ hybridization and 3C/4C experiments suggest that this enhancer, which is active in the neural tube and posterior diencephalon, influences the expression of the Olig1 and/or Olig2 genes. This work provides a new approach for the large-scale in vivo screening of transcriptional regulatory sequences, and further demonstrates that evolutionary conservation alone seems too limiting a criterion for the identification of enhancers.
21408183	6	2011	PLoS One	Chromosome conformation capture uncovers potential genome-wide interactions between human conserved non-coding sequences.	Comparative analyses of various mammalian genomes have identified numerous conserved non-coding (CNC) DNA elements that display striking conservation among species, suggesting that they have maintained specific functions throughout evolution. CNC function remains poorly understood, although recent studies have identified a role in gene regulation. We hypothesized that the identification of genomic loci that interact physically with CNCs would provide information on their functions. We have used circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) to characterize interactions of 10 CNCs from human chromosome 21 in K562 cells. The data provide evidence that CNCs are capable of interacting with loci that are enriched for CNCs. The number of trans interactions varies among CNCs; some show interactions with many loci, while others interact with few. Some of the tested CNCs are capable of driving the expression of a reporter gene in the mouse embryo, and associate with the oligodendrocyte genes OLIG1 and OLIG2. Our results underscore the power of chromosome conformation capture for the identification of targets of functional DNA elements and raise the possibility that CNCs exert their functions by physical association with defined genomic regions enriched in CNCs. These CNC-CNC interactions may in part explain their stringent conservation as a group of regulatory sequences.
21204256	5	2011	Proteomics	Proteomic analysis of male 4C germ cell proteins involved in mouse meiosis.	Male meiosis is a specialized type of cell division that gives rise to sperm. Errors in this process can result in the generation of aneuploid gametes, which are associated with birth defects and infertility in humans. Until now, there has been a lack of a large-scale identification of proteins involved in male meiosis in mammals. In this study, we report the high-confidence identification of 3625 proteins in mouse male germ cells with 4C DNA content undergoing meiosis I. Of these, 397 were found to be testis specific. Bioinformatics analysis of the proteome led to the identification of 28 proteins known to be essential for male meiosis in mice. We also found 172 proteins that had yeast orthologs known to be essential for meiosis. Chromosome distribution analysis of the proteome showed underrepresentation of the identified proteins on the X chromosome, which may be due to meiotic sex chromosome inactivation. Characterization of the proteome of 4C germ cells from mouse testis provides an inventory of proteins, which is useful for understanding meiosis and the mechanisms of male infertility.
21938629	4	2011	Methods Mol Biol	Detecting long-range chromatin interactions using the chromosome conformation capture sequencing (4C-seq) method.	Eukaryotic transcription is tightly regulated by transcriptional regulatory elements, even though these elements may be located far away from their target genes. It is now widely recognized that these regulatory elements can be brought in close proximity through the formation of chromatin loops, and that these loops are crucial for transcriptional regulation of their target genes. The chromosome conformation capture (3C) technique presents a snapshot of long-range interactions, by fixing physically interacting elements with formaldehyde, digestion of the DNA, and ligation to obtain a library of unique ligation products. Recently, several large-scale modifications to the 3C technique have been presented. Here, we describe chromosome conformation capture sequencing (4C-seq), a high-throughput version of the 3C technique that combines the 3C-on-chip (4C) protocol with next-generation Illumina sequencing. The method is presented for use in mammalian cell lines, but can be adapted to use in mammalian tissues and any other eukaryotic genome.
22206006	3	2011	PLoS One	tRNA gene identity affects nuclear positioning.	The three-dimensional organization of genomes is dynamic and plays a critical role in the regulation of cellular development and phenotypes. Here we use proximity-based ligation methods (i.e. chromosome conformation capture [3C] and circularized chromosome confrmation capture [4C]) to explore the spatial organization of tRNA genes and their locus-specific interactions with the ribosomal DNA. Directed replacement of one lysine and two leucine tRNA loci shows that tRNA spatial organization depends on both tRNA coding sequence identity and the surrounding chromosomal loci. These observations support a model whereby the three-dimensional, spatial organization of tRNA loci within the nucleus utilizes tRNA gene-specific signals to affect local interactions, though broader organization of chromosomal regions are determined by factors outside the tRNA genes themselves.
21948239	2	2011	Mol Cell Biochem	CTCF and cohesin cooperatively mediate the cell-type specific interchromatin interaction between Bcl11b and Arhgap6 loci.	CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a master organizer of genome spatial organization and plays an important role in mediating extensive chromatin interactions. Circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) is a high-throughput approach that allows genome-wide screening for unknown potential interaction partners. Using a conserved CTCF binding site on the Bcl11b locus as bait, an interaction partner at the Arhgap6 locus on a different chromosome was identified by 4C. Additional experiments verified that the interchromatin interaction between the Bcl11b and Arhgap6 loci was cell-type specific, which was cooperatively mediated by CTCF and cohesin. Functional analysis showed that the interchromatin interaction partners were repressing regulatory elements. These results indicate that interaction chromatin loops regulate the expression of the relevant genes.
21520399	2	2011	Cytometry A	High-purity flow sorting of early meiocytes based on DNA analysis of guinea pig spermatogenic cells.	Mammalian spermatogenesis is still nowadays poorly understood at the molecular level. Testis cellular heterogeneity is a major drawback for spermatogenic gene expression studies, especially when research is focused on stages that are usually very short and poorly represented at the cellular level such as initial meiotic prophase I (i.e., leptotene [L] and zygotene [Z]). Presumably, genes whose products are involved in critical meiotic events such as alignment, pairing and recombination of homologous chromosomes are expressed during the short stages of early meiotic prophase. Aiming to characterize mammalian early meiotic gene expression, we have found the guinea pig (Cavia porcellus) as an especially attractive model. A detailed analysis of its first spermatogenic wave by flow cytometry (FCM) and optical microscopy showed that guinea pig testes exhibit a higher representation of early meiotic stages compared to other studied rodents, partly because of their longer span, and also as a result of the increased number of cells entering meiosis. Moreover, we have found that adult guinea pig testes exhibit a peculiar 4C DNA content profile, with a bimodal peak for L/Z and P spermatocytes that is absent in other rodents. Besides, we show that this unusual 4C peak allows the separation by FCM of highly pure L/Z spermatocyte populations aside from pachytene ones, even from adult individuals. To our knowledge, this is the first report on an accurate and suitable method for highly pure early meiotic prophase cell isolation from adult mammals, and thus sets an interesting approach for gene expression studies aiming at a deeper understanding of the molecular groundwork underlying male gamete production.
21674259	1	2011	Chromosome Res	Similar rye A and B chromosome organization in meristematic and differentiated interphase nuclei.	Supernumerary (B) chromosomes of rye are not required for plant development and exhibit a reduced transcription activity. These special features inspired us to analyse whether there are differences between A and B chromatin organization in interphase nuclei. Applying fluorescence in situ hybridization, we found that both rye A and B chromosomes added to hexaploid wheat showed in meristematic nuclei a string-like shape and a clear Rabl orientation. In 4C differentiated leaf nuclei, a more relaxed chromatin structure, round-shaped chromosome territories and a less pronounced Rabl configuration were found. Also, the observed random association of homologues in 2C and 4C nuclei indicated in general a similar behaviour of A and B chromosomes. Whereas in differentiated 4C nuclei A sister centromeres are separated, B sister centromeres align in nearly all nuclei. In short, despite the different transcription activity of A and B chromosomes, both types of chromosomes exhibit a similar organization in meristematic and differentiated interphase nuclei. But the deletion of a B chromosome segment responsible for non-disjunction during gametogenesis induces released sister centromeres also in some interphase nuclei of somatic tissue. Hence, the control of rye B chromosome non-disjunction is also active in sporophytic cells.
21235344	1	2011	Cell Reprogram	Diploid oocyte formation and tetraploid embryo development induced by cytochalasin B in bovine.	Tetraploid embryos are a useful model for postimplantation development of polyploidy cells, and tetraploid cells are an advantage in studies for chimeras yielding offspring completely derived from embryo stem cells or induced pluripotent cells. This study was designed to investigate the effects of cytochalasin B (CB) on bovine oocyte meiosis, and to induce the formation of diploid oocytes and tetraploid embryos. The results showed that: (1) incubation of oocytes in CB at ≥2.0 μg/mL concentrations for 24 h significantly decreased oocyte maturation and the matured oocytes' haploid composition. Over 50% of the CB-treated oocytes did not expel PB1 (non-PB1), and most of the non-PB1 oocytes contained 2n (60) chromosomes. (2) Pretreatment of oocytes with CB at concentrations of 7.5 and 15 μg/mL for 10 h significantly decreased oocyte maturation. Posttreatment of oocytes with CB resulted in most of the oocytes containing 2n chromosomes. (3) The parthenogenetic blastocysts (25-28%) derived from the non-PB1 oocytes of posttreatment group was significantly higher than that from pretreatment, whole period treatment, and the control oocytes (12-16%). (4) Cytogenetic analysis of the embryos derived from CB-treated non-PB1 oocytes resulted in 74% of the one-cell stage embryos being 4n = 120 chromosomes, 82% of two-cell stage embryos contained 4n chromosomes in each blastomere, and 75% of the blastocysts were tetraploidy (4n = 120). (6) The stopped uncleaved one-cell embryos showed an amazing phenomenon of over 15% of them containing extra chromosomes, which suggested multiple DNA duplication occurred within 40 h after activation. In conclusion, CB inhibits PB1 extrusion, disfigures spindle structure, decreases oocyte maturation, and results in formation of diploid (2n or 4c) oocytes. The diploid oocytes resulted in a higher development of tetraploid embryos, which would be a unique approach for the production of tetraploid embryos in bovine.
21482532	0	2011	Yi Chuan	[The quality control of 4C-clone screening assay].	Circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) can be used to analyze the high-resolution interaction map of cis-regulatory elements in genome-wide studies. In this study, we optimized the condition of PCR with the mimical 4C sample in order to establish a specific and efficient assay, which was validated practically. This 4C-clone screening assay can be used as the quality control in the application of 4C assay.
21237220	0	2011	J Biotechnol	Identification of RNF2-responding loci in long-range chromatin interactions using the novel 4C-ChIP-Cloning technology.	RNF2 is a core component of Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1), which binds to various chromatic regions to regulate their transcriptional activity. It was recently reported that EZH2, a Polycomb group complex member, helps mediate long-range chromosomal interactions in mammalian cells. The present study investigates whether RNF2-responding loci interact in long-range chromatin. The new 4C-ChIP-Cloning technology was developed based on circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) and ChIP. Use of the 4C-ChIP-Cloning technology successfully identified four loci in long-range cis- or trans-interactions that were mediated by the RNF2 protein. RNAi experiments showed that RNF2 regulated the transcription levels of genes adjacent to the loci. These results suggest that RNF2 protein, as part of PRC1, mediates long-range interactions between RNF2-interation loci and regulates adjacent genes. This 4C-ChIP-Cloning technology may contribute to the study of protein-mediated long-range chromatin interactions with specific regulatory elements.
21051298	2	2010	Mol Oncol	Spatio-temporal composition of the mitotic Chromosomal Passenger Complex detected using in situ proximity ligation assay.	Cell division is orchestrated by a complex protein network that aims to maintenance of genomic stability. Visualisation of mitotic protein-protein associations in space and time has been limited due to the lack of proper biochemical and easy-to-use imaging tools. Here we report adaptation of the in situ proximity ligation assay (is-PLA) to study mitotic protein interactions with spatio-temporal resolution. We examined the composition of the Chromosomal Passenger Complex (CPC) at various mitotic phases and after chemical treatments using is-PLA with antibodies against the core CPC subunits Aurora B, INCENP, Survivin and Borealin. Our results support the notion that the core CPC functions as a single structural unit at centromeres in early mitosis and at central spindle after the onset of anaphase. Treatment of cells with the Aurora B inhibitor ZM447439 diminished the is-PLA signals at centromeres suggesting that Aurora B activity contributes to structural maintenance and/or proper subcellular localization of the core CPC. Is-PLA-based analysis of interaction between INCENP and Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) proposes that the kinase co-travels with CPC during late mitosis. The data illustrates both the strengths and limitations of the is-PLA in the analysis of mitotic macromolecule associations at sub-organelle level.
20927371	1	2010	PLoS One	Analysis of β-globin chromatin micro-environment using a novel 3C variant, 4Cv.	Higher order chromatin folding is critical to a number of developmental processes, including the regulation of gene expression. Recently developed biochemical techniques such as RNA TRAP and chromosome conformation capture (3C) have provided us with the tools to probe chromosomal structures. These techniques have been applied to the β-globin locus, revealing a complex pattern of interactions with regions along the chromosome that the gene resides on. However, biochemical and microscopy data on the nature of β-globin interactions with other chromosomes is contradictory. Therefore we developed a novel 4C variant, Complete-genome 3C by vectorette amplification (4Cv), which allows an unbiased and quantitative method to examine chromosomal structure. We have used 4Cv to study the microenvironment of the β-globin locus in mice and show that a significant proportion of the interactions of β-globin are inter-chromosomal. Furthermore, our data show that in the liver, where the gene is active, β-globin is more likely to interact with other chromosomes, compared to the brain where the gene is silent and is more likely to interact with other regions along the same chromosome. Our data suggest that transcriptional activation of the β-globin locus leads to a change in nuclear position relative to the chromosome territory.
20658121	1	2010	Theor Appl Genet	A new chromosome nomenclature system for oat (Avena sativa L. and A. byzantina C. Koch) based on FISH analysis of monosomic lines.	Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with multiple probes was used to analyze mitotic and meiotic chromosome spreads of Avena sativa cv 'Sun II' monosomic lines, and of A. byzantina cv 'Kanota' monosomic lines from spontaneous haploids. The probes used were A. strigosa pAs120a (a repetitive sequence abundant in A-genome chromatin), A. murphyi pAm1 (a repetitive sequence abundant in C-genome chromatin), A. strigosa pITS (internal transcribed spacer of rDNA) and the wheat rDNA probes pTa71 (nucleolus organizer region or NOR) and pTa794 (5S). Simultaneous and sequential FISH employing pairs of these probes allowed the identification and genome assignation of all chromosomes. FISH mapping using mitotic and meiotic metaphases facilitated the genomic and chromosomal identification of the monosome in each line. Of the 17 'Sun II' lines analyzed, 13 distinct monosomic lines were found, corresponding to four monosomes of the A-genome, five of the C-genome and four of the D-genome. In addition, 12 distinct monosomic lines were detected among the 20 'Kanota' lines examined, corresponding to six monosomes of the A-genome, three of the C-genome and three of the D-genome. The results show that 19 chromosomes out of 21 of the complement are represented by monosomes between the two genetic backgrounds. The identity of the remaining chromosomes can be deduced either from one intergenomic translocation detected on both 'Sun II' and 'Kanota' lines, or from the single reciprocal, intergenomic translocation detected among the 'Sun II' lines. These results permit a new system to be proposed for numbering the 21 chromosome pairs of the hexaploid oat complement. Accordingly, the A-genome contains chromosomes 8A, 11A, 13A, 15A, 16A, 17A and 19A; the C-genome contains chromosomes 1C, 2C, 3C, 4C, 5C, 6C and 7C; and the D-genome consists of chromosomes 9D, 10D, 12D, 14D, 18D, 20D and 21D. Moreover, the FISH patterns of 16 chromosomes in 'Sun II' and 15 in 'Kanota' suggest that these chromosomes could be involved in intergenomic translocations. By comparing the identities of individually translocated chromosomes in the two hexaploid species with those of other hexaploids, we detected different types of intergenomic translocations.
20927530	0	2010	Childs Nerv Syst	A novel NF1 gene mutation in an Italian family with neurofibromatosis type 1.	PURPOSE: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant disorder with an estimated incidence of one in 3,500 births. Clinically, NF1 is characterized by café-au-lait (CAL) spots, neurofibromas, freckling of the axillary or inguinal region, Lisch nodules, optic nerve glioma, and bone dysplasias. NF1 is caused by inactivating mutations of the 17q11.2-located NF1 gene. We present a clinical and molecular study of an Italian family with NF1.METHODS: The proband, a 10-year-old boy, showed large CAL spots and freckling on the axillary region and plexiform neurofibromas on the right side only. His father (47 years old) showed, in addition to the similar signs, numerous neurofibromas of various sizes on his thorax, abdomen, back, and shoulder. Two additional family members (a brother and a sister of the proband) presented only small CAL spots. The coding exons of NF1 gene were analyzed for mutations by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and sequencing in all family members.RESULTS: The mutational analysis of the NF1 gene revealed a novel frameshift insertion mutation in exon 4c (c.654 ins A) in all affected family members. This novel mutation creates a shift on the reading frame starting at codon 218 and leads to the introduction of a premature stop at codon 227.CONCLUSIONS: The segregation of the mutation with the affected phenotype and its absence in the 200 normal chromosomes suggest that it is responsible for the NF1 phenotype.
19559093	36	2009	Semin Cell Dev Biol	Genomic interactions: chromatin loops and gene meeting points in transcriptional regulation.	The chromosome conformation capture (3C) technique and its genome-wide applications ('4C') have identified a plethora of distal DNA sequences that are frequently in close spatial proximity. In many cases, these have been correlated with transcriptional regulation of the interacting genes, but the functional significance of many of the extreme long-range and interchromosomal interactions remains unclear. This review summarises our current understanding of how chromatin conformation can impinge on gene expression, the major questions that need to be addressed to understand this more fully, and how these questions may be answered in the near future.
19588093	22	2009	Methods Mol Biol	Chromosome conformation capture (from 3C to 5C) and its ChIP-based modification.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) methodology was developed to study spatial organization of long genomic regions in living cells. Briefly, chromatin is fixed with formaldehyde in vivo to cross-link interacting sites, digested with a restriction enzyme and ligated at a low DNA concentration so that ligation between cross-linked fragments is favored over ligation between random fragments. Ligation products are then analyzed and quantified by PCR. So far, semi-quantitative PCR methods were widely used to estimate the ligation frequencies. However, it is often important to estimate the ligation frequencies more precisely which is only possible by using the real-time PCR. At the same time, it is equally necessary to monitor the specificity of PCR amplification. That is why the real-time PCR with TaqMan probes is becoming more and more popular in 3C studies. In this chapter, we describe the general protocol for 3C analysis with the subsequent estimation of ligation frequencies by using the real-time PCR technology with TaqMan probes. We discuss in details all steps of the experimental procedure paying special attention to weak points and possible ways to solve the problems. A special attention is also paid to the problems in interpretation of the results and necessary control experiments. Besides, in theory, we consider other approaches to analysis of the ligation products used in frames of the so-called 4C and 5C methods. The recently developed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-loop assay representing a combination of 3C and ChIP is also discussed.
19820713	20	2009	Nat Methods	High-resolution identification of balanced and complex chromosomal rearrangements by 4C technology.	Balanced chromosomal rearrangements can cause disease, but techniques for their rapid and accurate identification are missing. Here we demonstrate that chromatin conformation capture on chip (4C) technology can be used to screen large genomic regions for balanced and complex inversions and translocations at high resolution. The 4C technique can be used to detect breakpoints also in repetitive DNA sequences as it uniquely relies on capturing genomic fragments across the breakpoint. Using 4C, we uncovered LMO3 as a potentially leukemogenic translocation partner of TRB@. We developed multiplex 4C to simultaneously screen for translocation partners of multiple selected loci. We identified unsuspected translocations and complex rearrangements. Furthermore, using 4C we detected translocations even in small subpopulations of cells. This strategy opens avenues for the rapid fine-mapping of cytogenetically identified translocations and inversions, and the efficient screening for balanced rearrangements near candidate loci, even when rearrangements exist only in subpopulations of cells.
19533160	9	2009	Chromosoma	Cohesin gene defects may impair sister chromatid alignment and genome stability in Arabidopsis thaliana.	In contrast to yeast, plant interphase nuclei often display incomplete alignment (cohesion) along sister chromatid arms. Sister chromatid cohesion mediated by the multi-subunit cohesin complex is essential for correct chromosome segregation during nuclear divisions and for DNA recombination repair. The cohesin complex consists of the conserved proteins SMC1, SMC3, SCC3, and an alpha-kleisin subunit. Viable homozygous mutants could be selected for the Arabidopsis thaliana alpha-kleisins SYN1, SYN2, and SYN4, which can partially compensate each other. For the kleisin SYN3 and for the single-copy genes SMC1, SMC3, and SCC3, only heterozygous mutants were obtained that displayed between 77% and 97% of the wild-type transcript level. Compared to wild-type nuclei, sister chromatid alignment was significantly decreased along arms in 4C nuclei of the homozygous syn1 and syn4 and even of the heterozygous smc1, smc3, scc3, and syn3 mutants. Knocking out SYN1 and SYN4 additionally impaired sister centromere cohesion. Homozygous mutants of SWITCH1 (required for meiotic sister chromatid alignment) displayed sterility and decreased sister arm alignment. For the cohesin loading complex subunit SCC2, only heterozygous mutants affecting sister centromere alignment were obtained. Defects of the alpha-kleisin SYN4, which impair sister chromatid alignment in 4C differentiated nuclei, do apparently not disturb alignment during prometaphase nor cause aneuploidy in meristematic cells. The syn2, 3, 4 scc3 and swi1 mutants display a high frequency of anaphases with bridges (~10% to &gt;20% compared to 2.6% in wild type). Our results suggest that (a) already a slight reduction of the average transcript level in heterozygous cohesin mutants may cause perturbation of cohesion, at least in some leaf cells at distinct loci; (b) the decreased sister chromatid alignment in cohesin mutants can obviously not fully be compensated by other cohesion mechanisms such as DNA concatenation; (c) some cohesin genes, in addition to cohesion, might have further essential functions (e.g., for genome stability, apparently by facilitating correct recombination repair of double-strand breaks).
19272779	7	2009	Neuromuscul Disord	The phenotype of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4C due to SH3TC2 mutations and possible predisposition to an inflammatory neuropathy.	Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a heterogeneous group of inherited peripheral motor and sensory neuropathies. The locus responsible for CMT4C was previously assigned to the chromosome 5q23 region by homozygosity mapping and mutations in the SH3TC2 (KIAA1985) gene have been subsequently identified mainly in families around the Mediterranean basin but also frequently in European Gypsies. No English families have been reported to date. To determine the frequency, phenotype and neuropathology of CMT due to SH3TC2 mutations we screened 23 English autosomal recessive (AR) demyelinating CMT families. Five families with AR demyelinating CMT and SH3TC2 mutations were identified, four families were homozygous for the R954X mutation and the fifth family was compound heterozygous for the R954X and E657K mutations. There was significant clinical variation between these families with some cases presenting with a severe childhood onset neuropathy with respiratory and cranial nerve involvement, compared to other families with mild scoliosis and foot deformity. Characteristic sural nerve neuropathology was seen in three families with frequent demyelinating fibres surrounded by excess Schwann cell lamellae forming basal lamina onion bulbs and abnormally long and attenuated Schwann cell processes. One patient homozygous for the R954X mutation had a 20-year history of an inflammatory neuropathy that was superimposed onto the hereditary form, indicating that structural alterations to the SH3TC2 gene could possibly predispose to peripheral nerve inflammation.
19235779	7	2009	Yeast	Repeated elements coordinate the spatial organization of the yeast genome.	The spatial organization of the chromosomes is crucial for gene expression and development. Inter- and intrachromosomal interactions form a crucial part of this epigenomic regulatory system. Here we use circular chromosome conformation capture-on-chip (4C) to identify interactions between repetitive and non-repetitive loci within the yeast genome. The interacting regions occur in non-randomly distributed clusters. Furthermore, the SIR2 histone deacetylase has opposing roles in the organization of the inter- or intrachromosomal interactions. These data establish a dynamic domain model for yeast genome organization. Moreover, they point to the repeated elements playing a central role in the dynamic organization of genome architecture.
19144027	1	2009	Reprod Domest Anim	Nuclear replacement of in vitro-matured porcine oocytes by a serial centrifugation and fusion method.	The objective of the present study was to establish a method for nuclear replacement in metaphase-II (M-II) stage porcine oocytes. Karyoplasts containing M-II chromosomes (K) and cytoplasts without chromosomes (C) were produced from in vitro-matured oocytes by a serial centrifugation method. The oocytes were then reconstructed by fusion of one karyoplast with 1, 2, 3 or 4 cytoplasts (K + 1C, K + 2C, K + 3C and K + 4C, respectively). Reconstructed oocytes, karyoplasts without fusion of any cytoplast (K) and zona-free M-II oocytes (control) were used for experiments. The rates of female pronucleus formation after parthenogenetic activation in all groups of reconstructed oocytes (58.2-77.4%) were not different from those of the K and control groups (58.2% and 66.0%, respectively). In vitro fertilization was carried out to assay the fertilization ability and subsequent embryonic development of the reconstructed oocytes. The cytoplast : karyoplast ratio did not affect the fertilization status (penetration and male pronuclear formation rates) of the oocytes. A significantly high monospermy rate was found in K oocytes (p &lt; 0.05, 61.6%) compared with the other groups (18.2-32.8%). Blastocyst formation rates increased significantly as the number of the cytoplasts fused with karyoplasts increased (p &lt; 0.05, 0.0-15.3%). The blastocyst rate in the K + 4C group (15.3%) was comparable with that of the control (17.8%). Total cell numbers in both the K + 3C and K + 4C groups (16.0 and 15.3 cells, respectively) were comparable with that of the control (26.2 cells). Our results demonstrate that a serial centrifugation and fusion (Centri-Fusion) is an effective method for producing M-II chromosome transferred oocytes with normal fertilization ability and in vitro development. It is suggested that the number of cytoplasts fused with a karyoplast plays a critical role in embryonic development.
18286208	36	2008	PLoS One	Maintenance of long-range DNA interactions after inhibition of ongoing RNA polymerase II transcription.	A relationship exists between nuclear architecture and gene activity and it has been proposed that the activity of ongoing RNA polymerase II transcription determines genome organization in the mammalian cell nucleus. Recently developed 3C and 4C technology allowed us to test the importance of transcription for nuclear architecture. We demonstrate that upon transcription inhibition binding of RNA polymerase II to gene regulatory elements is severely reduced. However, contacts between regulatory DNA elements and genes in the beta-globin locus are unaffected and the locus still interacts with the same genomic regions elsewhere on the chromosome. This is a general phenomenon since the great majority of intra- and interchromosomal interactions with the ubiquitously expressed Rad23a gene are also not affected. Our data demonstrate that without transcription the organization and modification of nucleosomes at active loci and the local binding of specific trans-acting factors is unaltered. We propose that these parameters, more than transcription or RNA polymerase II binding, determine the maintenance of long-range DNA interactions.
18274532	24	2008	Nat Protoc	High-resolution circular chromosome conformation capture assay.	The pioneering chromosome conformation capture (3C) method provides the opportunity to study chromosomal folding in the nucleus. It is based on formaldehyde cross-linking of living cells followed by enzyme digestion, intramolecular ligation and quantitative (Q)-PCR analysis. However, 3C requires prior knowledge of the bait and interacting sequence (termed interactor) rendering it less useful for genome-wide studies. As several recent reports document, this limitation has been overcome by exploiting a circular intermediate in a variant of the 3C method, termed 4C (for circular 3C). The strategic positioning of primers within the bait enables the identification of unknown interacting sequences, which form part of the circular DNA. Here, we describe a protocol for our 4C method, which produces a high-resolution interaction map potentially suitable for the analysis of cis-regulatory elements and for comparison with chromatin marks obtained by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on chip at the sites of interaction. Following optimization of enzyme digestions and amplification conditions, the protocol can be completed in 2-3 weeks.
18414058	10	2008	Cell Cycle	Cyclin B1 is rate limiting but not essential for mitotic entry and progression in mammalian somatic cells.	Cyclin B1 should have some rate limiting function for cell cycle progression. To test this, we measured the effect of siRNA-mediated depletion of cyclin B1 on mitotic entry and timing. We depleted cyclin B1 in HeLa and hTert-RPE1 cells to levels equivalent or below those achieved in the telophase-to-G(1) window. Average cyclin B1/Cdk1 activity was measured in HeLa cells and depleted by approximately 99%. In both cell lines, this caused approximately 20% increase in the G(2) and approximately 20% increase the M traverse time. However, co-depletion of cyclin B1 and B2 induced a profound increase in G(2) cells, a dramatic reduction in mitotic cells, and an increase in a 4C cycling population. We conclude that any residual levels of cyclin B1 were not sufficient to promote stable mitotic entry and transition in absence of normal levels of cyclin B2. Therefore, we conclude that B cyclin is necessary for mitosis but cyclin B1 is not. Nocodazole treated, cyclin B1-depleted HeLa cells arrested but exited that arrest at higher rates than controls, suggesting that the duration of the spindle checkpoint was affected. In B1 depleted cells, population growth was delayed but evidence of cell death was not consistently observed. A strong phenotype of mitotic chromosomal aberration was observed in HeLa cells depleted for either cyclin but not in RPE cells. In B1 or B2 depleted cells, maloriented chromosomes at metaphase were increased 10 fold and one third of affected metaphase cells entered anaphase without congression. Lagging chromosomes at anaphase were dramatically increased. The aggregate evidence from our study and others suggests that the common effect of cyclin B1 depletion is mild cell cycle perturbation. Lack of uniformity in other phenotypes suggest that these are low penetrance effects that are exacerbated or compensated in some systems by other mechanisms.
18193258	3	2008	Chromosoma	Arabidopsis sister chromatids often show complete alignment or separation along a 1.2-Mb euchromatic region but no cohesion &quot;hot spots&quot;.	Sister chromatid cohesion is a prerequisite for correct segregation and possibly other functions of replicated chromosomes. Except for yeast, no details are known about arrangement of cohesion sites along interphase chromosomes. Within nuclei of several higher plants, sister chromatids are frequently not aligned at various positions along chromosome arms. Therefore, we tested whether preferential alignment positions (&quot;cohesion hot spots&quot;) and constant extension of and distances between aligned sites occur in plants. Along a approximately 1.2-Mb contig from the bottom arm of chromosome 1, the sister chromatid positions of 13 individual BAC inserts were found to be aligned for approximately 67-77% of homologues in 4C Arabidopsis thaliana nuclei. The differences between the 13 BAC positions were not significant at the P &lt; 0.01 level. This suggests variability of alignment positions between cells and indicates the absence of cohesion &quot;hot spots&quot;. Similar as for single BACs, FISH with the entire contig indicated complete alignment for approximately 69% and complete separation of sister chromatids for approximately 31% of homologues in 4C nuclei. Partial alignment or separation was barely detectable. When three BAC inserts from a 760-kb region were tested simultaneously, alignment or separation of only the central BAC occurred in 3.3% and 3.5% of replicated chromosomes, respectively. Thus, we assume that sister chromatids can be separated or aligned within a Mb range in differentiated cells. However, the minimum extension of aligned sites or distances between them may (in rare cases) fall below ~500 kb.
18355967	2	2008	Neuroscience	Inhibiting activator protein-1 activity alters cocaine-induced gene expression and potentiates sensitization.	We have expressed A-FOS, an inhibitor of activator protein-1 (AP-1) DNA binding, in adult mouse striatal neurons. We observed normal behavior including locomotion and exploratory activities. Following a single injection of cocaine, locomotion increased similarly in both the A-FOS expressing and littermate controls. However, following repeated injections of cocaine, the A-FOS expressing mice showed increased locomotion relative to littermate controls, an increase that persisted following a week of withdrawal and subsequent cocaine administration. These results indicate that AP-1 suppresses this behavioral response to cocaine. We analyzed mRNA from the striatum before and 4 and 24 h after a single cocaine injection in both A-FOS and control striata using Affymetrix microarrays (430 2.0 Array) to identify genes mis-regulated by A-FOS that may mediate the increased locomotor sensitization to cocaine. A-FOS expression did not change gene expression in the basal state or 4 h following cocaine treatment relative to controls. However, 24 h after an acute cocaine treatment, 84 genes were identified that were differentially expressed between the A-FOS and control mice. Fifty-six genes are down-regulated while 28 genes are up-regulated including previously identified candidates for addiction including brain-derived neurotrophic factor and period homolog 1. Using a random sample of identified genes, quantitative PCR was used to verify the microarray studies. The chromosomal location of these 84 genes was compared with human genome scans of addiction to identify potential genes in humans that are involved in addiction.
18751442	1	2008	Anticancer Res	Micronuclei and broken eggs in human liver carcinogenesis.	BACKGROUND: Micronuclei (MNi) and broken eggs (BE) are both considered sensitive markers of genotoxic damage and chromosomal instability. In humans, a high frequency of MNi is reported in both cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, but no information is available on MNi/BE expression in dysplastic nodules. MNi/BE formation may result in activation of the p53-mediated cell cycle checkpoint.MATERIALS AND METHODS: MNi, BE (Feulgen staining) and immunohistochemical expression of p53 and Mib1 were assessed in 95 liver lesions representing the whole spectrum of liver carcinogenesis. Seven normal liver tissue samples served as controls. MNi and BE were assessed by video-assisted microscopy and expressed as a crude number per 1,000 hepatocytes.RESULTS: MNi and BE were significantly more frequent in all the pathological samples than in the controls (p&lt;0.001). A progressively increasing number of MNi/BEs was documented from cirrhotic nodules (CN) to large regenerative nodules (LRN), to dysplastic nodules (DN) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (test for trend; p&lt;0.001). MNi were significantly more frequent in DN than in CN or LRN (p=0.011; p=0.020, respectively). Proliferative activity (Mib1) and p53 expression were significantly associated with MNi presence (p&lt;0.001 and p=0.031, respectively).CONCLUSION: Chromosomal instability significantly increases throughout the multistep course of hepatocarcinogenesis. The similar prevalence of MNi and BEs in DN and HCC supports their strict biological similarity. A high prevalence of MNi/BE may identify a subset of (genetically unstable) cancer-prone cirrhosis cases.
18347800	1	2008	Plant Cell Rep	Chromosomal DNA content of sweet pepper determined by association of cytogenetic and cytometric tools.	The nuclear DNA content of sweet pepper (Capsicum annuum L. var. annuum, 2n = 24) has been measured by flow and image cytometries but the DNA content of each chromosome of this species has not yet been regarded. DNA content of individual chromosomes has been quantified by the flow karyotyping technique, which requires a great quantity of intact metaphasic chromosomes and methods that allow the characterization of individual chromosomes; however, the obtainment of adequate number of metaphases can be difficult in some species like C. annuum. In order to estimate the DNA content of each C. annuum var. annuum cv. &quot;New Mexican&quot; chromosome, flow and image cytometries were associated with the cytogenetic methodology. First, the DNA amount (2C = 6.90 pg) was established by flow cytometry. Integrated optical density (IOD) values were calculated by image cytometry for each Feulgen stained metaphasic chromosome. Then, by distributing the correspondent metaphasic value (4C = 13.80 pg) proportionally to average IOD values, the following chromosomal DNA contents were obtained in pg: 0.74 (chromosome 1), 0.67 (2), 0.61 (3, 4), 0.60 (5), 0.59 (6, 7), 0.58 (8), 0.57 (9), 0.56 (10) and 0.39 (11, 12). This study reports an alternative and reproducible technique that makes quantifying the chromosomal DNA content possible.
18182079	1	2008	Eur J Haematol	Haplotype analysis of the H63D, IVS2+4t/c, and C282Y polymorphisms of the HFE gene reveals rare events of intragenic recombination.	OBJECTIVE: Two missense mutations of the HFE gene, one (C282Y) being a major gene for hereditary hemochromatosis and the other (H63D) playing a minor role in this disease, are carried by different haplotypes. Among other sequence variants of HFE, IVS2+4t/c polymorphism has been reported as a possible splicing mutation or risk modifier. Our aims were to identify sequence variants possibly associated with iron overload in our population, to study the intragenic haplotypes of the HFE gene, and to evaluate the role of IVS2+4t/c in hyperferritinemia.METHODS: We screened by direct sequencing the coding sequence and intron-exon boundaries of HFE in 265 patients with hyperferritinemia and 185 subjects from the general population.RESULTS: Linkage disequilibrium between the three pairs of polymorphic sites was complete between H63D and C282Y, whereas all four gametic types were present for both the H63D-IVS2+4t/c and the IVS2+4t/c-C282Y site pairs. The data supported a model in which the IVS2+4t/c polymorphism was ancestral, the D(63) mutation occurred on the t chromosome, and the Y(282) mutation occurred on the c chromosome; after the population spread of both mutations, intragenic recombination occurred on both sides of the t/c polymorphism, generating the rare haplotypes D(63)-c(IVS2+4)-C(282) and H(63)-t(IVS2+4)-Y(282).CONCLUSIONS: The IVS2+4c/t is a neutral polymorphism with regard to risk of iron overload. The presence of recombinant haplotypes on both its sides suggests a considerable evolutionary age of the two main risk alleles.
18428230	0	2008	Curr Protoc Hum Genet	ISCN rules for listing chromosomal rearrangements.	It contains the standard system for numbering human chromosomes and constitutional rearrangements and the banding pattern for normal chromosomes at 400-, 550-, and 850-band levels of resolution. ISCN 1995 also contains guidelines for cancer cytogenetics and for in situ hybridization. The complete ISCN 1995 also contains nomenclature for human meiotic chromosomes (not included here). The guidelines presented herein are recommended for use when reporting karyotypes, designating chromosome rearrangements and aberrations, and indicating regions of the genome where DNA sequences are located. It contains the standard system for numbering human chromosomes and constitutional rearrangements and the banding pattern for.
17971780	107	2007	Nat Methods	An evaluation of 3C-based methods to capture DNA interactions.	The shape of the genome is thought to play an important part in the coordination of transcription and other DNA-metabolic processes. Chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology allows us to analyze the folding of chromatin in the native cellular state at a resolution beyond that provided by current microscopy techniques. It has been used, for example, to demonstrate that regulatory DNA elements communicate with distant target genes through direct physical interactions that loop out the intervening chromatin fiber. Here we discuss the intricacies of 3C and new 3C-based methods including the 4C, 5C and ChIP-loop assay.
17884460	18	2007	Curr Opin Genet Dev	Inter-chromosomal gene regulation in the mammalian cell nucleus.	Cellular phenotypes can critically rely on mono-allelic gene expression. Recent studies suggest that in mammalian cells inter-chromosomal DNA interactions may mediate the decision which allele to activate and which to silence. Here, these findings are discussed in the context of knowledge on gene competition, chromatin dynamics, and nuclear organization. We argue that data obtained by 4C technology strongly support the idea that chromatin folds according to self-organizing principles. In this concept, the nuclear positioning of a given locus is probabilistic as it also depends on the properties of neighbouring DNA segments and, by extrapolation, the whole chromosome. The linear distribution of repetitive DNA sequences and of active and inactive DNA regions is important for the folding and relative positioning of chromosomes. This stochastic concept of nuclear organization predicts that tissue-specific interactions between two selected loci present on different chromosomes will be rare.
17467258	15	2007	Curr Opin Cell Biol	Long-range DNA contacts: romance in the nucleus?	Recent studies show that genes far apart on the same chromosome or even on different chromosomes can come together in the nuclear space. It has been hypothesized that functionally related genes 'kiss' at transcription factories to coordinate their expression. Novel high-throughput methods, such as 4C technology, that study DNA interactions in an unbiased manner should uncover the generality of this romantic concept of nuclear architecture.
17466501	10	2007	Curr Opin Cell Biol	The 4C technique: the 'Rosetta stone' for genome biology in 3D?	Despite considerable efforts, the spatial link between the nuclear architecture and the genome remains enigmatic. The 4C method, independently innovated in four different laboratories, might in combination with other methods change that. As this method is based on the unbiased identification of sequences interacting with specific baits, there are unique opportunities for unravelling the secrets of how the genome functions in 3D.
17284369	3	2007	Cancer Genet Cytogenet	Bipolar genome reductional division of human near-senescent, polyploid fibroblast cells.	The rise in mitotic polyploid cells in near-senescence (phase III) of human fibroblast cells has been found to contain diplochromosomes (four chromatids). For tetraploid cells, this translates into 46 pairs of sister chromosomes. It has been suggested, from the increase in numbers of such cells, that they might deviate from expected normal, single chromatid segregations in mitosis. In this study, the polyploid cells with diplochromosomes were shown to segregate by bipolar mitosis into genome-reduced cells. Sister pairs separated from each other and moved as a genomic group of two-chromatid chromosomes to the poles. A tetraploid cell thus became reduced to two diploid cells (i.e., G2-4c in G1), which in the next mitosis could either restore the previous diplochromosomal status and ploidy level or cycle as diploid mitotic cells. The polyploid cells that are programmed for genome reductional division become part of the senescent cell population. In such populations, there is depolyploidization into multinucleated cells (MNCs) that can spawn genome-reduced mitotic offspring cells. These facts are relevant to neoplasticity-associated cytopathologies such as 4n cells as intermediates in Barrett's esophagus, MNCs in human papillomavirus infections, and radiation-associated cell changes. On a cell population level, the bipolar genome reductional division is a source for genetic heterogeneity, generating a continued mixture of polyploid and genome-reduced cells. The only other known case is in the mosquito, but the phenomenon is likely more common than has been thought.
18076109	0	2007	Arch Insect Biochem Physiol	The DNA puff 4C expresses a salivary secretion protein in Trichosia pubescens (Diptera; Sciaridae).	DNA puffs are genomic regions of polytene chromosomes that undergo developmentally controlled DNA amplification and transcription in salivary glands of sciarid flies. Here, we tested the hypothesis that DNA puff genes code for salivary proteins in Trichosia pubescens. To do that, we generated antibodies against saliva and immunoscreened a cDNA library made from salivary glands. We isolated clones corresponding to DNA puff regions, including clone D-50 that contained the entire coding sequence of the previously isolated C4B1 gene from puff 4C. Indeed, we showed that puff 4C is a DNA puff region detecting its local transcription and its extra rounds of DNA incorporation compared to neighboring regions. We further confirmed D-50 clone identity in Western blots reacted with the anti-saliva anitiserum. We detected a recombinant protein expressed by this clone that had the expected size for a full-length product of the gene. We end with a discussion of the relationship between DNA puff genes and their products.
17944179	0	2007	Zhong Yao Cai	[Study on karyotype and giemsa C-banding of Aquilaria sinensis].	OBJECTIVE: To study Aquilaria sinensis (Lour.) Spreng chromosome karyotype and C-banding.METHOD: Sections for karvotvpe and BSG method for C-banding.RESULTS: The somatic chromosome number was 2n=16, karyotype formula was K(2n) = 2x = 16 = 6m + 6sm + 4st, based on Levan's publication in 1964. According to the method of Kuo, the chromosome based on the relative length was 2n = 16 = 4L + 4M2 + 6M1 + 2S, which belonged to &quot;2B&quot;. 8 pairs chromosomes had 34 C-bands and the C-banding patter was 2n = 2x = 16 = 4C + 2I + 2T + 2CI+ + 2CI+ T + 2CI+ T+ + 2I+ T+.CONCLUSION: The data of karyotype and C-banding indicated A. sinensis chromosome had a relatively high asymmetry and was in the advanced stage of evolution, which offered the evidence for further genetic analysis.
17854438	0	2007	Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol	Different behaviour of implanted stem cells in intact and lesioned forebrain cortices.	Cell-replacement therapy promises a useful tool to regenerate compromised brain tissue, but the interaction between grafted cells and host tissues is not well understood. In these studies, the fates of neuroectodermal stem cells were compared in 'healthy' or damaged mouse forebrains. One-cell derived, fluorescent GFP-4C neural stem cells were implanted into normal and cold-lesioned mouse cortices. The fates of implanted cells were followed by histological and immunocytochemical assays for a 55-day postimplantation period. Cells were recultivated from lesioned cortices and characterized by cell cycle parameters, chromosome numbers, immunocytochemical markers and in vitro inducibility. Their intracerebral fates were checked upon re-implanting into 'healthy' mouse brain cortices. GFP-4C cells, giving rise to neurones and astrocytes upon in vitro induction, failed to differentiate in either normal or lesioned cortical tissues. The rate of proliferation and the length of the survival, however, depended on the host environment, markedly. In intact cortices, implanted cells formed compact, isolated aggregates and their survival did not exceed 4 weeks. In compromised cortices, GFP-4C cells survived longer than 8 weeks and repopulated the decayed region. The morphology, viability, immunocytochemical properties, in vitro inducibility and chromosome number of cells recultivated from lesioned cortices were identical to those of the master cells. Long-term survival and repopulating capability were due to signals present in the lesioned, but missing from the intact cortical environment. The results underline the importance of host environment in the fate determination of grafted cells and emphasize the need to understand the 'roles' of recipient tissues for potential cell-replacement methodologies.
19069758	0	2007	Rev Biol Trop	Molecular phylogenetic relationships among four species of the mangrove tree genus Bruguiera (Rhizophoraceae), as revealed by chromosome and RAPD markers.	Analysis of karyotype, nuclear DNA content and RAPD markers were performed in four species of Bruguiera (Rhizophoraceae) of Bhitarkanika mangrove forests, Orissa, India. Detailed karyotype analysis revealing 2n=34 in B. cylindrica and 2n=36 in B. gymnorrhiza was reported for the first time and 2n=34 in B. parviflora and B. sexangula was confirmed. On the basis of the common types of chromosomes present among Bruguiera, two distinct groups were found; one consists of B. cylindrica and B. parviflora and the other of B. gymnorrhiza and B. sexangula. The symmetrical karyotype with same chromosome types grouped B. cylindrica and B. parviflora together and presence of Type E chromosomes placed B. gymnorrhiza and B. sexangula in a separate group, suggesting their closer affinity in their respective group. Analysis of chromosome length, volume, INV and 4C DNA content confirmed this division. Nuclear DNA content was two-fold higher (approximately 17.0 pg) in the second group than in the first (approximately 8.0 pg). The amplification products generated through RAPD revealed 1-9 amplicons with size variations from 600 bp to 2 500 bp with 49.31% genetic similarity between B. gymnorrhiza and B. sexangula and 47.10% in between B. cylindrica and B. parviflora. The high copy number marker band (approximately 1,100 bp) yielded in OPN-15 primer in B. parviflora the characteristic DNA marker, which was cloned and used as probes for assessment of genetic diversity, and demonstrated its close genetic affinity to B. cylindrica. B. gymnorrhiza and B. sexangula also produced similar marker bands of approximately 600 bp and approximately 2,200 bp in the same primer. All of the cytological, 4C DNA content and RAPD data confirmed the existence of two taxonomically distinct groups of Bruguiera: one consisting of B. cylindrica and B. parviflora and the other of B. gymnorrhiza and B. sexangula as placed earlier (1862) in the tribe Rhizophoreae by Bentham and Hooker, on the basis of the flowering habits ofBruguiera. Genetically, the B. sexangula and B. gymnorrhiza group was found to be very closely, rather than distantly, related to B. parviflora and B. cylindrica. Our results demonstrate that molecular markers together with cytological evidence provide an effective tool to access the existing interspecific genetic polymorphism in mangrove species, to solve the taxonomic problems and to design their conservation strategy.
17033623	269	2006	Nat Genet	Nuclear organization of active and inactive chromatin domains uncovered by chromosome conformation capture-on-chip (4C).	The spatial organization of DNA in the cell nucleus is an emerging key contributor to genomic function. We developed 4C technology (chromosome conformation capture (3C)-on-chip), which allows for an unbiased genome-wide search for DNA loci that contact a given locus in the nuclear space. We demonstrate here that active and inactive genes are engaged in many long-range intrachromosomal interactions and can also form interchromosomal contacts. The active beta-globin locus in fetal liver preferentially contacts transcribed, but not necessarily tissue-specific, loci elsewhere on chromosome 7, whereas the inactive locus in fetal brain contacts different transcriptionally silent loci. A housekeeping gene in a gene-dense region on chromosome 8 forms long-range contacts predominantly with other active gene clusters, both in cis and in trans, and many of these intra- and interchromosomal interactions are conserved between the tissues analyzed. Our data demonstrate that chromosomes fold into areas of active chromatin and areas of inactive chromatin and establish 4C technology as a powerful tool to study nuclear architecture.
17033624	212	2006	Nat Genet	Circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) uncovers extensive networks of epigenetically regulated intra- and interchromosomal interactions.	Accumulating evidence converges on the possibility that chromosomes interact with each other to regulate transcription in trans. To systematically explore the epigenetic dimension of such interactions, we devised a strategy termed circular chromosome conformation capture (4C). This approach involves a circularization step that enables high-throughput screening of physical interactions between chromosomes without a preconceived idea of the interacting partners. Here we identify 114 unique sequences from all autosomes, several of which interact primarily with the maternally inherited H19 imprinting control region. Imprinted domains were strongly overrepresented in the library of 4C sequences, further highlighting the epigenetic nature of these interactions. Moreover, we found that the direct interaction between differentially methylated regions was linked to epigenetic regulation of transcription in trans. Finally, the patterns of interactions specific to the maternal H19 imprinting control region underwent reprogramming during in vitro maturation of embryonic stem cells. These observations shed new light on development, cancer epigenetics and the evolution of imprinting.
16924012	11	2006	Neurology	Spine deformities in Charcot-Marie-Tooth 4C caused by SH3TC2 gene mutations.	BACKGROUND: Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a heterogeneous group of inherited peripheral motor and sensory neuropathies with several modes of inheritance: autosomal dominant, X-linked, and autosomal recessive (AR) CMT. A locus responsible for the demyelinating form of ARCMT was assigned to the 5q23-q33 region (CMT4C) by homozygosity mapping. Recently, 11 mutations were identified in the SH3TC2 (KIAA1985) gene in 12 families with demyelinating ARCMT from Turkish, Iranian, Greek, Italian, or German origin.OBJECTIVE: To identify mutations in the SH3TC2 gene.METHODS: The authors searched for SH3TC2 gene mutations in 10 consanguineous CMT families putatively linked to the CMT4C locus on the basis of haplotype segregation and linkage analysis.RESULTS: Ten families had mutations, eight of which were new and one, R954X, recurrent. Six of the 10 mutations were in exon 11. Onset occurred between ages 2 and 10. Scoliosis or kyphoscoliosis and foot deformities were found in almost all patients and were often inaugural. The median motor nerve conduction velocity values (&lt;/=34 m/s) were not correlated with disease duration. The functional disability score was &lt;/=3, indicating that the patients could walk without help. Unexpectedly, typical giant axons were observed on biopsies from a large Algerian family.CONCLUSIONS: Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 4C (CMT4C) is less severe than other autosomal recessive (AR) CMT. Intrafamilial variability is important, making phenotype-genotype correlations difficult, but spine deformities are clearly a hallmark of CMT4C. In the presence of scoliosis, a neurologic examination is recommended. Giant axons on biopsies are also suggestive of CMT4C. For genetic analysis, the R954X mutation should be looked for before systematic sequencing of exon 11.
16520877	4	2006	Protoplasma	Colchicine-induced polyploidization depends on tubulin polymerization in c-metaphase cells.	The microtubule cytoskeleton plays a crucial role in the cell cycle and in mitosis. Colchicine is a microtubule-depolymerizing agent that has long been used to induce chromosome individualization in cells arrested at metaphase and also in the induction of polyploid plants. Although attempts have been made to explain the processes and mechanisms underlying polyploidy induction, the role of the cytoskeleton still remains largely unknown. Through immunodetection of alpha-tubulin, different concentrations (0.5 or 5 mM) of colchicine were found to produce opposite effects in the organization of the cytoskeleton in rye (Secale cereale L.). A low concentration (0.5 mM) induced depolymerization of the microtubular cytoskeleton in all phases of the cell cycle. In contrast, a high concentration (5 mM) was found to induce the polymerization of new tubulin-containing structures in c-metaphase cells. Furthermore, both treatments also showed contrasting effects in the induction of polyploid cells. Flow cytometric analysis and quantitative assessments of nucleolus-organizing regions revealed that only the high-concentration colchicine treatment was effective in the formation of polyploid cells. Our studies indicate that spindle disruption alone is insufficient for the induction of polyploid cells. The absence of any tubulin structures in plants treated with colchicine at the low concentration induced cell anomalies, such as the occurrence of nuclei with irregular shape and/or (additional) micronuclei, 12 h after recovery, pointing to a direct effect on cell viability. In contrast, the almost insignificant level of cell anomalies in the high-concentration treatment suggests that the presence of new tubulin-containing structures allows the reconstitution of 4C nuclei and their progression into the cell cycle.
16736253	3	2006	Protoplasma	Chromosome endoreduplication as a factor of salt adaptation in Sorghum bicolor.	Nuclear DNA amounts were measured by Feulgen cytophotometry in Sorghum bicolor cv. 610 plants early exposed to 150 mM NaCl, a treatment known to induce an increased tolerance to salinity in plants carrying this genotype. In salt-treated plants, the percentages of 8C, 16C, and 32C nuclei in roots in the primary state of growth were 21.9%, 13.3%, and 4.3%, respectively. By contrast, in nonsalinized plants, only 3.5% of the nuclei had an 8C content and no higher DNA contents were observed. The salt treatment induced chromosome endoreduplication during the differentiation of cells in the root cortex, where 41.2% of the cells displayed a DNA content higher than 4C (versus 1.3% in control plants). No enhancement of endopolyploidy was observed in cells of the root vascular cylinder or the leaves of the salt-treated plants. In another S. bicolor genotype (DK 34-Alabama), noncompetent for salt adaptation, the same NaCl treatment did not induce chromosome endoreduplication in root cortex cells. Endopolyploidy may be considered as a part of the adaptive response of S. bicolor competent genotypes to salinity.
16711385	0	2006	Tsitologiia	[A study of DNA depolyploidization and depolytenization of the heterochromatized gonosomal chromatin bodies in the secondary giant trophoblast cells of the field vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis using cytophotometry].	A study was made of the distribution of the heterochromatized gonosomal chromatin bodies (GCB) material in the course of nuclear fragmentation of secondary giant trophoblast cells resulting in polykaryocyte formation at the late stage of their differentiation. A simultaneous DNA cytophotometry in GCBs and nuclear fragments showed a progressive GCB DNA content decrease proportional to that of DNA content in nuclear fragments. DNA contents in the nuclear fragments corresponded to 2c, 4c and 8c. In most cases 1-2 GCBs were found in the nuclear fragments of different ploidy levels. Both the total DNA content in GCBs and the DNA content in separate GCBs well correlated with the ploidy levels of fragments. The data obtained demonstrate a regular, whole-genome distribution of chromosomal materials into the nuclear fragments exemplified by sex chromosome distribution in compliance with the ploidy of nuclear fragments. We discuss a possible mechanism of nuclear fragmentation that may ensure substantially a balanced genome of nuclear fragments without leading to mitotic cycle renewal in the giant trophoblast cell population.
16602238	0	2006	Tsitologiia	[Morpho-functional parameters of nucleoli in polyploid mucous and albumen cells of salivary gland in the snail Succinea lauta].	Variation of some characteristics of nucleoli of polyploid mucous and albumen cells was examined in salivary glands of the snail Succinea lauta. The number, total area and Ag-protein content of nucleoli, and DNA content in each nucleus were estimated on squashed preparations incubated with AgNO3, decolorized and then Feulgen stained. The ultrastructure of nucleoli was studied by electron microscopy. Differentiated mucous cells had 4c-8c-16c-32c nuclei; albumen cells had 8c-16c-32c-64c-128c nuclei. The ultrastructure of nucleoli of the two cell types was essentially the same. Normally, a large fibrous to granular zone was observed in the nucleoli, without a clear distinction between fibrous and granular components. At the same time, aggregations of granular matter could be discerned at the periphery of nucleoli. No fibrous centers were observed. Occassionally, nucleolonema-like structures occurred. Normally each nucleolus contacted several chromosomes. On squashed preparations, the least size of nucleoli was 2-3 microm, and the largest size amounted to 14 microm in mucous cells, and to 50-80 microm in albumen cells. The number of nucleoli rose from 1-2 in tetraploid nuclei to 2-3 in 32c-nuclei, and to 5-7 in 128c-nuclei. The disparity between the ploidy levels of nuclei and the numbers of nucleoli may be due, presumably, to aggregation of chromosome NORs. The Ag-protein content in the nucleoli, and the total nucleolar area displayed a strong mutual correlation. Both parameters differed significantly by 1.5-2.2 times in mucous and albumen cells of the same ploidy level. Thus, in albumen and mucous cells the total Ag-protein content in octaploid nuclei was 3.3 and 2.2 relative units (r. u.), respectively. In 16c- and 32c-nuclei of albumen cells, it was 7.6 and 15.1 r. u.; and in the same nuclei of mucous cells--3.8 and 6.8 r. u., respectively. On the whole, in albumen cells, in the course of 4 endocycles (4c-128c), the total Ag-protein content increased by 17 times. Therefore, the mean multiplication factor for this parameter was found to be 2.05 per endocycle. In mucous cells, in the course of 3 endocycles (4c-32c), the total Ag-protein content increased by 5.2 times against 8 times expected, with the mean multiplication factor equal to 1.75 per endocycle. Thus, in the course of polyploidization of albumen and mucous cell nuclei, the gene dosage effect was fully pronounced in the former, and only partly in the latter. This differtence is due obviously to peculiarities of differentiation of the two cell types, in particular, to differences in the number of activated ribosomal genes.
16316755	13	2005	Cell Biol Int	Cell reproduction and genome multiplication in the proliferative and invasive trophoblast cell populations of mammalian placenta.	Spatiotemporal &quot;time-table&quot; of ways of cell reproduction (mitosis, restitutional mitosis, endomitosis, endoreduplication) of trophoblast cell populations is described. The populations of mitotically active trophoblast cells (diploid and low-polyploid) are located mostly out of contact with maternal tissues. In rodent placenta they mainly switch from mitotic cycle to polyploidizing (restitutional) mitoses and reach 4c-8c. Thereafter they switch to endoreduplication and reach 16c-64c. Following a series of endoreduplication cycles a part of this cell population sets apart and penetrates deeply into the decidualized endometrium and myometrium, their capabilities for replication being lost progressively (in rodent--256c-1024c). The invasive trophoblast cells that reach 256c-1024c via endoreduplication simultaneously form a barrier between semiallogenic fetal and maternal tissues. Arrest of mitoses and complete repression of DNA replication after a series of endoreduplication cycles makes hardly probable the renewal of mitotic activity in the deeply invading tertiary giant trophoblast cells, thereby preventing the possibility of their ectopic expanding in the maternal tissues during the normal pregnancy.
15659402	13	2005	J Biol Chem	Novel symmetric and asymmetric DNA scission determinants for Streptococcus pneumoniae topoisomerase IV and gyrase are clustered at the DNA breakage site.	Topoisomerase (topo) IV and gyrase are bacterial type IIA DNA topoisomerases essential for DNA replication and chromosome segregation that act via a transient double-stranded DNA break involving a covalent enzyme-DNA &quot;cleavage complex.&quot; Despite their mechanistic importance, the DNA breakage determinants are not understood for any bacterial type II enzyme. We investigated DNA cleavage by Streptococcus pneumoniae topo IV and gyrase stabilized by gemifloxacin and other antipneumococcal fluoroquinolones. Topo IV and gyrase induce distinct but overlapping repertoires of double-strand DNA breakage sites that were essentially identical for seven different quinolones and were augmented (in intensity) by positive or negative supercoiling. Sequence analysis of 180 topo IV and 126 gyrase sites promoted by gemifloxacin on pneumococcal DNA revealed the respective consensus sequences: G(G/c)(A/t)A*GNNCt(T/a)N(C/a) and GN4G(G/c)(A/c)G*GNNCtTN(C/a) (preferred bases are underlined; disfavored bases are in small capitals; N indicates no preference; and asterisk indicates DNA scission between -1 and +1 positions). Both enzymes show strong preferences for bases clustered symmetrically around the DNA scission site, i.e. +1G/+4C, -4G/+8C, and particularly the novel -2A/+6T, but with no preference at +2/+3 within the staggered 4-bp overhang. Asymmetric elements include -3G and several unfavored bases. These cleavage preferences, the first for Gram-positive type IIA topoisomerases, differ markedly from those reported for Escherichia coli topo IV (consensus (A/G)*T/A) and gyrase, which are based on fewer sites. However, both pneumococcal enzymes cleaved an E. coli gyrase site suggesting overlap in gyrase determinants. We propose a model for the cleavage complex of topo IV/gyrase that accommodates the unique -2A/+6T and other preferences.
16157681	10	2005	Genetics	Sister chromatids are often incompletely aligned in meristematic and endopolyploid interphase nuclei of Arabidopsis thaliana.	We analyzed whether sister chromatids are continuously aligned in meristematic and endopolyploid Arabidopsis interphase nuclei by studying sister-chromatid alignment at various chromosomal positions. FISH with individual BACs to flow-sorted 4C root and leaf nuclei frequently yielded more than two hybridization signals, indicating incomplete or absent sister-chromatid alignment. Up to 100% of 8C, 16C, and 32C nuclei showed no sister-chromatid alignment at defined positions. Simultaneous FISH with BACs from different chromosomal positions revealed more frequent sister-chromatid alignment in terminal than in midarm positions. Centromeric positions were mainly aligned up to a ploidy level of 16C but became separated or dispersed in 32C nuclei. DNA hypomethylation (of the whole genome) and transcriptional activity (at FWA gene position) did not impair sister-chromatid alignment. Only 6.1% of 4C leaf nuclei showed sister-chromatid separation of the entire chromosome 1 top arm territories. Homozygous transgenic tandem repeat (lac operator) arrays showing somatic homologous pairing more often than average euchromatic loci did not promote an increased frequency of sister-chromatid alignment. The high frequency of separated sister-chromatid arm positions in &gt; or =4C nuclei suggests that sister-chromatid cohesion is variable, dynamic, and not obligatory along the entire chromosome arm in meristematic and differentiated Arabidopsis nuclei.
16314124	2	2005	Cell Biol Int	Whole-genome chromosome distribution during nuclear fragmentation of giant trophoblast cells of Microtus rossiaemeridionalis studied with the use of gonosomal chromatin arrangement.	Gonosomal chromatin bodies (GCBs), i.e. blocks of condensed chromatin consisting of heterochromatized region of the sex chromosomes of the field vole M. rossiaemeridionalis, were used as a natural interphase chromosome marker in order to clarify the regularities of GCB rearrangement during nuclear fragmentation of secondary giant trophoblast cells (SGTCs) at the end of their differentiation. Cytophotometrical measurements of DNA content in the nuclei, nuclear fragments and simultaneously in the GCBs were made in the secondary giant SGTCs of field vole M. rossiaemeridionalis. In most cases 1 to 2 GCBs get into the nuclear fragments at different ploidy levels. In the nuclear fragments, GCB DNA content decreased mostly proportionally to DNA content in the whole fragments corresponding to 2c, 4c and 8c. The data obtained demonstrate a regular whole-genome chromosome distribution into nuclear fragments. A possible mechanism of nuclear fragmentation that largely ensures a balanced genome in nuclear fragments is discussed.
16047412	0	2005	Z Naturforsch C	Assessment of genetic diversity among 16 promising cultivars of ginger using cytological and molecular markers.	Ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) is an economically important plant, valued all over the world. The existing variation among 16 promising cultivars as observed through differential rhizome yield (181.9 to 477.3 g) was proved to have a genetic basis using different genetic markers such as karyotype, 4C nuclear DNA content and random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD). The karyotypic analysis revealed a differential distribution of A, B, C, D and E type of chromosomes among different cultivars as represented by different karyotype formulas. A significant variation of 4C DNA content was recorded in ginger at an intraspecific level with values ranging from 17.1 to 24.3 pg. RAPD analysis revealed a differential polymorphism of DNA showing a number of polymorphic bands ranging from 26 to 70 among 16 cultivars. The RAPD primers OPC02, OPA02, OPD20 and OPN06 showing strong resolving power were able to distinguish all 16 cultivars. The extent of genetic diversity among these cultivars was computed through parameters of gene diversity, sum of allele numbers per locus and Shannon's information indices. Cluster analysis, Nei's genetic similarity and genetic distances, distribution of cultivars into special distance classes and principal coordinate analysis and the analysis of molecular variance suggested a conspicuous genetic diversity among different cultivars studied. The genetic variation thus detected among promising cultivars of ginger has significance for ginger improvement programs.
15813221	0	2005	Acta Biol Hung	Determination of ploidy levels in Ipheion uniflorum (R. C. Graham) Rafin (Liliaceae).	In this study, chromosome number and ploidy levels of Ipheion uniflorum cv. &quot;Wisley Blue&quot; (spring starflower) were determined. In meristematic root tip cells, chromosome number was found as 2n = 12 and 4n = 24. The ratios of diploid and tetraploid cells were found as 80.74% and 19.26%, respectively. In differentiated root tissues and mature leaf tissues ploidy levels were analysed by flow cytometry and polysomaty were found in both organs. In differentiated root tissues, ploidy levels were found as 2C, 4C, 8C and 16C DNA. In root tissues percentages of 2C, 4C, 8C and 16C nuclear DNA content were observed as 57.2%, 33.1%, 2.47% and 7.23%, respectively. In mature leaf tissues, ploidy levels were determined 2C, 4C, 8C and 16C DNA. In this tissue the frequency of 4C DNA was found very higher (74.3%) and 2C DNA content was determined as 19.2%. In mature leaf tissue, 8C and 16C nuclear DNA contents were observed as 2.72% and 3.78%, respectively. When nuclear DNA contents in leaves and roots were compared, an apparent difference in 2C and 4C DNA contents was found.
15703049	0	2005	Hereditas	Statistical and image analysis of sister chromatid exchange in maize.	The present study reports the use of the fluorescence plus Giemsa (FPG) technique, image analysis and statistical methods to assess the sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) frequency in maize. Roots derived from germinated maize seeds were treated with BrdU solution and fixed. The slides were prepared by enzymatic cellular dissociation, air-drying technique, stained with Hoechst 33258 fluorochrome, and incubated in salt solution. The chromosomes were irradiated with ultraviolet light and stained with Giemsa solution. The FPG technique associated with digital analysis system was used to measure the length of 597 BrdU-incorporated maize chromosomes and to identify 0.5243 SCE per chromosome. A range from 0 to 4 SCE events were classified and the chi-square test (chi2=1.586, P=0.662) showed a good fit to the hypothesis that the SCEs are independent and random events that follow Poisson distribution. The SCE frequencies in long and short chromosome arms corresponded to a mean value of 0.876 SCE microm(-1). Considering that the maize line used in this study contains 5.78 picogram (pg) DNA (2C value) in interphasic G0/G1 nuclei or 11.56 pg DNA (4C value) in metaphase, and that the DNA mean value corresponds to 0.578 pg/metaphasic chromosome, the analysis suggests an occurrence of approximately 0.9 SCE/pg DNA.
15546025	3	2004	Asian J Androl	Radio-protective effect of vitamin E on spermatogenesis in mice exposed to gamma-irradiation: a flow cytometric study.	AIM: To investigate the effect of vitamin E on the radioprotection of spermatogenesis and chromatin condensation of spermatozoa during passage through the epididymis in mice exposed to irradiation.METHODS: Adult outbred male ICR mice were orally administered natural vitamin E (VE, D-alpha-tocopheryl acetate) at 400 IU/kg for 7 days before exposure to 1 Gy of gamma-irradiation. The animals were sacrificed at day 1, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35 and 70 post-irradiation (IR) and the percentage of testicular germ cells and epididymal sperm chromatin condensation was analyzed using flow cytometry.RESULTS: Serum D-alpha-tocopheryl acetate levels were 47.4+/-3.2 microg/dL in the treated group, yet it could not be detected in the control group. The testicular weight of irradiated mice pretreated with VE+IR was significantly (P&lt;0.05) higher than that of those without VE treatment (IR) at day 14 and 21 post-irradiation. The percentage of primary spermatocytes (4C) in the VE+IR group was comparable to the controls but significantly (P&lt;0.05) higher than those in the IR group from day 7 to 35 post-irradiation. The percentage of round spermatids (1C) in the VE+IR group was also significantly (P&lt;0.05) higher than those in the IR group at day 28 post-irradiation. The primary spermatocytes : spermatogonia ratio in the IR group was significantly (P&lt;0.05) declined at day 7 to 35 post-irradiation when compared to the VE+IR and control groups. The round spermatid : spermatogonia ratio in the VE+IR group was significantly (P&lt;0.05) higher than that of the IR group at day 14 and 28 post-irradiation. The chromatin condensation of epididymal spermatozoa measured by propidium iodide uptake was not affected by 1 Gy of gamma-irradiation.CONCLUSION: The administration of VE prior to irradiation protects spermatogenic cells from radiation.
15473375	3	2004	Tsitologiia	Genome multiplication of extravillous trophoblast cells in human placenta in the course of differentiation and invasion into endometrium and myometrium. II. Mechanisms of polyploidization.	Peculiarities of the structure of interphase nuclei, mitotic activity, and Ki-67 protein intranuclear immunolocalization were studied to elucidate mechanisms of genome multiplication in proliferative and differentiating invasive extravillous trophoblast cells in the human placenta. The presence of numerous chromocenters was shown to be a characteristic feature of proliferative cell nuclei of both villous and extravillous trophoblast. At the beginning of extravillous trophoblast cell differentiation, i.e. in the proximal part of cell columns, some amount of cells with large nuclei containing enlarged chromocenters were found. DNA content was measured simultaneously with counting the number of chromocenters in similarly looking nuclei of squash preparations of placental villi. The increase in the ploidy level up to 4c-8c, accompanied by a slight increase in the number of chromocenters being not proportional to the ploidy level and not exceeding the diploid number of chromosomes of the human genome, was demonstrated. This suggests that genome multiplication of extravillous trophoblast cells may be accomplished by endoreduplication. In addition, pictures of endomitosis were seen at early steps of differentiation of EVT cells. The lack of polyploid mitotic figures or any obvious polyploidizing or restitutional mitoses suggests that these are not of considerable importance in genome multiplication of human EVT cells. However, the prevalence of metaphases at the boundary of the distal part of cell columns suggests that restitutional mitoses may be involved, even partly, in human trophoblast cell polyploidization. At later steps of differentiation, i.e. in the distal part of cell columns, the nuclear structure obviously changes, with a uniform &quot;network&quot; chromatin arrangement prevailing, whereas numerous chromocenters and features of endomitosis are no longer seen. The pattern of Ki-67 protein immunolocalization is also changing along the invasive pathway. In the proliferating stem cells and trophoblast cells of the proximal part of cell columns, Ki-67 was localized in the karyoplasm, chromocenters and numerous small nucleoli, whereas in the distal part of cell columns this protein was detected predominantly in 1-2 large nucleoli. The comparative analysis of the literature data on Ki-67 localization at different stages of cell cycle provided another evidence that EVT cells in the course of invasion may switch to the endoreduplication cycle. In agreement with the relevant report on rodent placentation, our present data suggest that acquirement of an invasive phenotype of EVT cells is accompanied by switching from mitotic division to endoreduplication cycle.
15261725	1	2004	Ecotoxicol Environ Saf	Effect of a low dose of aluminum on mitotic and meiotic activity, 4C DNA content, and pollen sterility in rice, Oryza sativa L. cv. Lalat.	Aluminum toxicity in acidic soils poses a major threat to plant growth and development. The effects of a low dose of aluminum (50 microM, AlCl3) on various cytological parameters, including mitotic and meiotic chromosomal divisions, in situ nuclear DNA content, interphase nuclear volume (INV), and pollen fertility were compared in untreated (controls) and treated rice plants (Oryza sativa cv. Lalat). The results showed varied chromosomal abnormalities, including chromosome stickiness, laggards, sticky bridge, occurrence of micronuclei, as well as binucleate and multinucleated cells, as a result of aluminum treatment. Aluminum toxicity also inhibited to a small extent the growth of the rice cultivar Lalat. The mitotic and meiotic indexes, even after a prolonged period of recovery, were significantly low. The chromosomal anomalies in the meiotic cells persisted, and plants exhibited a high percentage of pollen sterility (approximately 64%). The nuclear DNA content declined markedly from 11.85 pg in the control to 6.30 pg in the treated plants. The INV also varied significantly between the untreated (controls) and the treated plants. The occurrences of different types of chromosomal aberrations, reduction in the amount of nuclear DNA, and persistence of the phytotoxic effects at the post-treatment stage suggest carcinogenic effects of aluminum on rice plants. The presence of aluminum in acidic soils might thus be extremely hazardous and might cause permanent cytotoxic disorder in rice plants.
15623944	0	2004	Cell Oncol	DNA ploidy and chromosome (FISH) pattern analysis of peripheral nerve sheath tumors.	BACKGROUND AND METHODS: 44 peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNST) (27 schwannomas, 9 neurofibromas and 8 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST)) were analyzed to determine DNA ploidy pattern and to clarify the conflicting data in the literature concerning this topic (whether benign PNSTs are aneuploid or not). For further insight we analyzed 6 schwannomas, one atypical neurofibroma and five MPNSTs by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique using centromeric chromosome probes (7, 17 and 18) and automatic image analysis station, Metafer 4.RESULTS: Benign schwannomas (including the problematic variants as ancient, cellular, neuroblastoma like and multiplex schwannomas) could be characterized by euploid-polyploidisation and by their 4c peak height value which was usually more than 10% of total cell number measured. These characters were not found among neurofibromas and MPNST-s. FISH analysis revealed and confirmed that the 'normal' euploid-polyploid cells are mainly eusomic-polysomic containing two, four, eight or sixteen signals for each chromosomes examined, but in a small proportion aneusomy was found among tumor cells of benign schwannomas (average: 2.58; range 1.33-3.44). In contrast, the atypical neurofibroma displayed marked aneusomy (18.44%) but it contained normal eusomic and polysomic cells too. Two diploid MPNSTs proved to be clearly aneusomic with trisomy of chromosome 17 and monosomy of chromosome 18.CONCLUSIONS: All these data suggest that ploidy pattern determination combined with FISH analysis may be a very useful supplementary tool for making a right diagnosis (to differentiate benign versus malignant schwannomas in problematic variants) and to understand better the malignant transformation in PNSTs.
15609544	0	2004	Genetica	Identification of RAPD markers, in situ DNA content and structural chromosomal diversity in some legumes of the mangrove flora of Orissa.	Randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) markers, karyotypes and 4C DNA content were analyzed in five legume mangroves belonging to the sub-family Papilinoideae (Dalbergia spinosa, Derris heterophylla and D. indica) and Caesalpinioideae (Caesalpinia crista, Cynometra ramiflora) of the family Fabaceae to establish the genetic variability and phylogenetic affinities. Somatic chromosome numbers were reported for the first time in D. spinosa (2n = 20), C. ramiflora (2n = 26) and D. heterophylla (2n = 24) with reconfirmation of the somatic chromosome number in D. indica (2n = 22) and C. crista (2n = 24). Significant intergeneric and interspecific variation of 4C DNA content was observed and that varied from 8.970 pg in C. ramiflora to 28.730 pg in D. indica. From the RAPD analysis, the dendogram showed clustering of Caesalpinia crista and Cynomitra ramiflora into one group (81.80). In the second groups Derris indica and Derris heterophylla were more similar (83.10) than Dalbergia spinosa (85.80). Species-specific DNA markers (900 bp) obtained in D. spinosa from OPN15; 700 and 2000 bp in C. ramiflora from OPN4 and 400 and 800 bp in D. heterophylla and 500 bp DNA fragment in C. crista obtained from OPN-11 were found characteristic RAPD markers of these species. C. crista found more closer affinity to C. ramiflora of the sub-family Caesalpinioideae [genetic distance (1-F) = 0.847]. Derris indica showed closer genetic relation with D. heterophylla [genetic distance (1-F) = 0.856] than D. spinosa [genetic distance (1-F) = 0.876] where Derris and Dalbergia belongs to the sub-family Papilionoideae. By employing these markers the present study has helped to resolve the relationship between the taxonomically diverse leguminous mangroves and study their ability to coexist with mangroves that would shed light on the evolution of mangroves from terrestrial species.
15350597	0	2004	Cell Biol Int	Karyotype analyses and studies on the nuclear DNA content in 30 genotypes of potato (Solanum tuberosum) L.	The cytophotometric estimation of 4C DNA content, and karyotypic and somatic chromosome number analyses were carried out in 30 genotypes comprising seven cultivars and 23 advanced breeding lines of Solanum tuberosum. Detailed karyotype analysis revealed genotype specific chromosomal characteristics and structural alterations in chromosomes of the genome, with a rare phenomenon of aneusomatic (2n = 4x + 2 = 50) condition in cv.K. Chandramukhi. The origin of this variation could be attributed to mitotic non-disjunction in the shoots giving rise to aneusomatic roots. Highly significant variations in the genome length, volume and total form percentage were noted at the cultivar level. The total chromosome length varied from 84.56 microm in cv.K. Pukhraj to 127.62 microm in MS/89-60, with an average value of 100.94 microm +/- 1.82. Total chromosome volume varied from 57.22 microm3 in MS/92-1090 to 132.64 microm3 in JW-160. Significant variations in the 4C DNA content (7.28-15.83 pg) were recorded at the cultivar level, with an exceptionally high DNA content (22.24 pg) in cv.K. Chandramukhi. This could be due to the aneusomatic condition of this genotype. Correlation studies revealed interdependence between the chromosomal and nuclear parameters of the genotypes. Structural alterations in the chromosomes, as well as loss or addition of highly repetitive sequences in the genome, caused variations in DNA content at the cultivar level. Variations in genomic structure and nuclear DNA content of the 48-chromosome genotypes suggest a genetic drift during microevolution, leading to the development of new cultivars.
15341672	0	2004	BMC Cell Biol	Systemic endopolyploidy in Spathoglottis plicata (Orchidaceae) development.	BACKGROUND: Endopolyploidy is developmentally regulated. Presence of endopolyploidy as a result of endoreduplication has been characterized in insects, mammals and plants. The family Orchidaceae is the largest among the flowering plants. Many of the members of the orchid family are commercially micropropagated. Very little has been done to characterize the ploidy variation in different tissues of the orchid plants during development.RESULTS: The DNA contents and ploidy level of nuclei extracted from various tissues of a tropical terrestrial orchid Spathoglottis plicata were examined by flow cytometry. Sepals, petals and ovary tissues were found to have only a 2C (C, DNA content of the unreplicated haploid chromosome complement) peak. Columns, floral pedicels of newly open flowers and growing flower stems were observed to have an endopolyploid 8C peak in addition to 2C and 4C peaks. In developing floral pedicels, four peaks were observed for 2C, 4C, 8C and 16C. In root tips, there were 2C, 4C and 8C peaks. But in the root tissues at the region with root hairs, only a 2C peak was observed. Nuclei extracted from young leaves shown three peaks for 2C, 4C and 8C. A similar pattern was found in the vegetative tissues of both greenhouse-grown plants and tissue-cultured plantlets. In mature leaves, a different pattern of ploidy level was found at different parts of the leaves. In the leaf tips and middle parts, there were 2C and 4C peaks. Only at the basal part of the leaves, there were three peaks for 2C, 4C and 8C.CONCLUSIONS: Systemic variation of cellular endopolyploidy in different tissues during growth and development of Spathoglottis plicata from field-grown plants and in vitro cultures was identified. The implication of the findings was discussed.
14574644	24	2003	Am J Hum Genet	Mutations in a gene encoding a novel SH3/TPR domain protein cause autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 4C neuropathy.	Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4C (CMT4C) is a childhood-onset demyelinating form of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy associated with an early-onset scoliosis and a distinct Schwann cell pathology. CMT4C is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait and has been mapped to a 13-cM linkage interval on chromosome 5q23-q33. By homozygosity mapping and allele-sharing analysis, we refined the CMT4C locus to a suggestive critical region of 1.7 Mb. We subsequently identified mutations in an uncharacterized transcript, KIAA1985, in 12 families with autosomal recessive neuropathy. We observed eight distinct protein-truncating mutations and three nonconservative missense mutations affecting amino acids conserved through evolution. In all families, we identified a mutation on each disease allele, either in the homozygous or in the compound heterozygous state. The CMT4C gene is strongly expressed in neural tissues, including peripheral nerve tissue. The translated protein defines a new protein family of unknown function with putative orthologues in vertebrates. Comparative sequence alignments indicate that members of this protein family contain multiple SH3 and TPR domains that are likely involved in the formation of protein complexes.
14564060	0	2003	J Appl Genet	Karyological characterization of sugar beet gynogenetic lines cultured in vitro.	Flow cytometry was used to screen ploidy levels in 47 cultured in vitro sugar beet gynogenetic lines of various origin and age, obtained after plant regeneration from unfertilized ovules. When donor plants were diploid, the majority of regenerants were found to have cells with 1C, 2C and 4C relative DNA content (mainly haploid and diploid) and there were large differences in the rate of spontaneous in vitro chromosome doubling between individual homozygous lines. Six ovule-derived lines regenerated from fertile and sterile diploid donors of forty-five lines were solid diploids from the very early stages of their in vitro cultivation, and thus could not be classified as doubled haploids. In the case of tetraploid donor plants, the gynogenetic regenerants demonstrated 2x-ploidy level. The results obtained in chimeric plants with both haploid and diploid cells indicated the possibility to overcome mixoploidy by their re-cultivation through generative shoot tip culture. The flow cytometry method confirmed data obtained by conventional microscopic chromosome counting in dividing leaf cells and was found very useful for screening of a large number of regenerants and for characterizing the process of in vitro gynogenetic lines formation in sugar beet.
12908755	0	2003	Clin Neuropathol	Recurrent and atypical meningiomas--a multiparametric study using Ki67 labelling index, AgNOR and DNA Feulgen staining.	OBJECTIVE: Histological analysis has limited value to predict the biological behavior of meningiomas. In this study, we investigated the utility of indicators of cell proliferation in the evaluation of histologically benign meningiomas.MATERIALS AND METHODS: For this purpose, 50 meningothelial meningiomas, 50 atypical meningiomas and 8 primary benign meningiomas with their recurrences were studied. For each case the Ki67 labeling index (LI), DNA ploidy and AgNOR were evaluated and the results quantitatively processed and assessed by computerized image analyzer.RESULTS: The Ki67 labelling showed a low index (11.3%) in typical meningiomas and primary meningiomas (13.6%). In contrast, it was higher in atypical (26.6%) and recurrent meningiomas (28%). Similar results were obtained for the AgNOR granule count which showed that typical and primary meningiomas had mean 1.51 - 1.49, whereas recurring meningiomas and atypical meningiomas had mean values of 1.92 and 1.98, respectively. DNA ploidy revealed in the hyperpolyploid region between 4c - 16c: 7.02% of the nuclei in primary meningiomas, 17.98% of the nuclei in recurring meningiomas and 24.63% of the nuclei in atypical meningiomas.CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that evaluation of cell proliferation using Ki67 LI, DNA ploidy and AgNOr, integrated with standard histopathology, can provide better information for a correct grading of meningiomas.
12561727	0	2003	Tsitologiia	[Flow cytometric analysis of ICRF-193 influence on cell passage through mitosis].	Studying the effect of topoisomerase II (topo II) inhibitors on cell passage through mitosis seems to be important for understanding the role of this enzyme during chromosome condensation and segregation. A flow cytometric assay (Zenin et al., 2001) allowed to determine the mitotic index, and to discriminate between not only cells in G2 and M phases (including metaphase and anaphase cells), but also cells in pseudo-G1 with 4c DNA content. It is shown that topo II catalytic inhibitor ICRF-193 blocks G2-M transition in a lymphoblastoid cell line GM-130. Addition of caffeine to cells abrogated a block of their entering mitosis but not the inhibitor action. Cells entered mitosis, which was proven by the presence of chromosomes in the examined specimen, and, bypassing anaphase, appeared in pseudo-G1 with 4c DNA content. We have found that in the presence of ICRF-193 cells, GM-130 and Hep-2 lines, previously blocked by nocodazole when in mitosis and then washed, pass through metaphase, enter anaphase and leave it to pass to pseudo-G1 with the 4c DNA content. Thus, by inhibiting topo II activity ICRF-193 causes abnormal mitotic transition.
11980891	2	2002	Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci	Mechanisms of myopia in Cohen syndrome mapped to chromosome 8q22.	PURPOSE: To analyze the mechanisms of myopia in Cohen syndrome (Mendelian Inheritance in Man [MIM] no. 216550).METHODS: A cross-sectional study of 22 Finnish patients (age range, 2-57 years) with Cohen syndrome, which maps to chromosome 8q22, was undertaken to record cycloplegic refraction, keratometry (corneal power and radius of curvature), biometry (anterior chamber depth [ACD], lens thickness [LT], axial [AL] and vitreal length [VL]), and Hoffer Q-modeled lens power. These components of refraction were correlated to age and spherical equivalent (SE) at the corneal plane. Contribution to total myopia of refractive (corneal and lenticular) and axial components was modeled by multiple linear regression and by estimating the effect of deviation from population mean values.RESULTS: The mean SE in patients with Cohen syndrome older than 10 years was -9.35 D; the mean cylinder power, +1.70 D; and the mean anisometropia, 0.53 D. Relative to the emmetropic eye of a young adult, the AL and VL (mean, 23.9 and 16.6 mm, respectively) and lens power (mean, 30.30 D) were higher in 74% and 93% of patients, respectively, and the ACD (mean, 2.5 mm) was smaller and the LT (mean, 4.9 mm) and corneal power (mean, 45.63 D) higher than average in all patients. Corneal power (r = 0.513, P = 0.021) increased with age, but AL and VL (P = 0.46 and 0.54, respectively) and lens power (P = 0.89) did not correlate with age. The lens power decreased with AL (r = -0.564, P = 0.029) and tended to increase with corneal power (r = 0.475, P = 0.074). Multiple linear regression identified AL and corneal power as independent predictors of SE. Based on deviation from population means, the lens power explained 55%, corneal power 23%, and AL 22% of total myopia. ACD decreased and LT increased markedly with age, rendering angle-closure glaucoma a possibility.CONCLUSIONS: Myopia in Cohen syndrome is mainly refractive in type and is due to high corneal and lenticular power, which is otherwise rare in young patients. It may be superimposed on axial myopia, probably related to polygenic factors that determine myopia in the general population. The refractive myopia in Cohen syndrome may result from dysgenesis and atrophy of the cornea, ciliary body, and iris, which in turn cause iridial and zonular laxity and spherophakia.
12502269	0	2002	Genome	Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of Avena sativa L. cv. SunII and its monosomic lines using cloned repetitive DNA sequences.	Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) employing multiple probes was used with mitotic or meiotic chromosome spreads of Avena sativa L. cv. SunII and its monosomic lines to produce physical chromosome maps. The probes used were Avena strigosa pAs120a (which hybridizes exclusively to A-genome chromosomes), Avena murphyi pAm1 (which hybridizes exclusively to C-genome chromosomes), A. strigosa pAs121 (which hybridizes exclusively to A- and D-genome chromosomes), and the wheat rDNA probes pTa71 and pTa794. Simultaneous and sequential FISH employing two-by-two combinations of these probes allowed the unequivocal identification and genome assignation of all chromosomes. Ten pairs were found carrying intergenomic translocations: (i) between the A and C genomes (chromosome pair 5A); (ii) between the C and D genomes (pairs 1C, 2C, 4C, 10C, and 16C); and (iii) between the D and C genomes (pairs 9D, 11D, 13D, and 14D). The existence of a reciprocal intergenomic translocation (10C-14D) is also proposed. Comparing these results with those of other hexaploids, three intergenomic translocations (10C, 9D, and 14D) were found to be unique to A. sativa cv. SunII, supporting the view that 'SunII' is genetically distinct from other hexaploid Avena species and from cultivars of the A. sativa species. FISH mapping using meiotic and mitotic metaphases facilitated the genomic and chromosomal identification of the aneuploid chromosome in each monosomic line. Of the 18 analyzed, only 11 distinct monosomic lines were actually found, corresponding to 5 lines of the A genome, 2 lines of the C genome, and 4 lines of the D genome. The presence or absence of the 10C-14D interchange was also monitored in these lines.
12469216	0	2002	Int J Mol Med	The kinesin superfamily protein Rab6KIFL is not involved in the pathophysiology of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4C.	Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4C (CMT4C) is an autosomal recessive peripheral neuropathy reported in several Algerian families. The gene locus of this disease has been narrowed to 5q31-33. Recently, a missense mutation in the gene for the kinesin superfamily KIF1B was reported as the cause of Charcot Marie Tooth disease type 2A (CMT2A). We suspected that Rab6KIFL, one of the kinesin superfamily proteins, might be involved in the pathophysiology of CMT4C, because Rab6KIFL gene is located in 5q31. The coding regions of the Rab6KIFL gene of genomic DNA derived from one Algerian family with CMT4C were analyzed by direct sequencing. No mutation in Rab6KIFL gene was found in this family. Further investigation is necessary to identify the causative gene for CMT4C.
11409637	2	2001	Cytobios	Cytophotometric estimation of in situ DNA content in several species of Araceae.	A wide variation in the in situ 4C DNA content, ranging from 15.02 pg to 54.09 pg was found in thirteen genera of the family Araceae. The obligate perennial species showed greater 4C DNA values compared with the facultative perennials and annuals. A remarkable heterogeneity in 4C nuclear DNA amounts was noted among obligate perennials. Intraspecific constancy in the amount of 4C DNA was recorded. The nuclear DNA content correlated positively with chromosome size, duration of the mitotic cycle, and annual to perennial growth forms. Despite an extensive variation in DNA content among the aroids investigated, each species was distinctly characterized by its specific nuclear DNA value, indicating its usefulness in taxonomic characterization and comparison of different aroids.
11448039	1	2001	Chromosome Res	Characterization of a mitotic mutant of durum wheat.	An ethyl methanesulfonate-induced mitotic mutant of durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L. var. durum; 2n = 4x = 28) was found. We have characterized the mutant to determine the mechanism of abnormal cell division and to test for temperature effects on abnormal cell division. Stained root-tip meristems and pollen mother cells were studied with brightfield, phase contrast, and immunofluorescence microscopy. Abnormal cells included metaphase cells with a multiple of the normal complement (8x = 56, or 16x = 112), multinucleate cells, 4C, 8C, or 16C mononucleate cells, and cells exhibiting incomplete cytokinesis. The mutant had three classes of pollen mother cells: euploid with normal bivalent pairing, multiploid with bivalent pairing, and multiploid with multivalent pairing. Preprophase bands and spindles were normal in mononucleate cells. Some cells had asymmetrical phragmoplasts and phragmoplast dismantling that produced incomplete cytokinesis. Failure of cytokinesis followed by nuclear fusion were the mechanisms of abnormal cell division. To test for temperature sensitivity of the mutant, seedlings were germinated under six different temperature regimes. As germination temperature increased, the frequency of abnormal cells increased. When the mutant was crossed as the female with durum wheat, 3% of hybrids were hexaploid, indicating that functional-unreduced gametes had formed in megaspores.
11432938	0	2001	J Exp Bot	Dormancy and proliferation in Saccharum officinarumxS. spontaneum hybrids which differ in the number of the introgressed S. spontaneum chromosomes.	Proliferating cells remain transiently blocked at different cycle compartments until specific stressors are removed or until the cells become adapted to their presence. This paper investigates the efficiency of cycle blocks in three sugarcane hybrids with the full noble cane (Saccharum officinarum) genome (2n=8x=80) but differing in the number of introgressed S. spontaneum (2n=8x=64) chromosomes. The My5514, B42231 and C236-51 cultivars possess 20, 30 and 40 additional S. spontaneum chromosomes, respectively. Flow cytometry showed that over 90% of cells were accumulated with a 2C DNA content in their dormant primordia. The presence of S. spontaneum chromosomes decreased the low stringency of the 4C block. The greater the number of these chromosomes, the lower was the number of quiescent cells with a 4C DNA content (P&lt;0.05). Shortly after stimulation of the primordia (85% relative humidity and 30 degrees C), i.e. in the 2 mm long roots, a negative correlation was found between the number of introgressed S. spontaneum chromosomes and the frequency of cells undergoing replication and mitosis. On the other hand, when roots were already proliferating under steady-state conditions (15 mm long roots) the more S. spontaneum chromosomes the cells possessed, the longer the relative time it took for all chromosomes to replicate and segregate, and the longer the relative time they spent in G(2), with the 4C DNA content. The presence of S. spontaneum chromosomes seems to be recognized by these proliferating cells as a stressor which preferentially activates checkpoint pathways operating at the second half of the cycle, but not at its onset.
10780262	39	2000	Pharmacogenetics	Eukaryotic aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) genes: human polymorphisms, and recommended nomenclature based on divergent evolution and chromosomal mapping.	As currently being performed with an increasing number of superfamilies, a standardized gene nomenclature system is proposed here, based on divergent evolution, using multiple alignment analysis of all 86 eukaryotic aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) amino-acid sequences known at this time. The ALDHs represent a superfamily of NAD(P)(+)-dependent enzymes having similar primary structures that oxidize a wide spectrum of endogenous and exogenous aliphatic and aromatic aldehydes. To date, a total of 54 animal, 15 plant, 14 yeast, and three fungal ALDH genes or cDNAs have been sequenced. These ALDHs can be divided into a total of 18 families (comprising 37 subfamilies), and all nonhuman ALDH genes are named here after the established human ALDH genes, when possible. An ALDH protein from one gene family is defined as having approximately &lt; or = 40% amino-acid identity to that from another family. Two members of the same subfamily exhibit approximately &gt; or = 60% amino-acid identity and are expected to be located at the same subchromosomal site. For naming each gene, it is proposed that the root symbol 'ALDH' denoting 'aldehyde dehydrogenase' be followed by an Arabic number representing the family and, when needed, a letter designating the subfamily and an Arabic number denoting the individual gene within the subfamily; all letters are capitalized in all mammals except mouse and fruit fly, e.g. 'human ALDH3A1 (mouse, Drosophila Aldh3a1).' It is suggested that the Human Gene Nomenclature Guidelines (http://++www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/nomenclature/guidelines.h tml) be used for all species other than mouse and Drosophila. Following these guidelines, the gene is italicized, whereas the corresponding cDNA, mRNA, protein or enzyme activity is written with upper-case letters and without italics, e.g. 'human, mouse or Drosophila ALDH3A1 cDNA, mRNA, or activity'. If an orthologous gene between species cannot be identified with certainty, sequential naming of these genes will be carried out in chronological order as they are reported to us. In addition, 20 human ALDH variant alleles that have been reported to date are listed herein and are recommended to be given numbers (or a number plus a capital letter) following an asterisk (e.g. 'ALDH3A2*2, ALDH2*4C'). It is anticipated that this eukaryotic ALDH gene nomenclature system will be extended to include bacterial genes within the next 2 years and that this nomenclature system will require updating on a regular basis; an ALDH Web site has been established for this purpose (http://++www.uchsc.edu/sp./sp./alcdbase/a ldhcov.html) and will serve as a medium for interaction amongst colleagues in this field.
10730215	3	2000	Int Rev Cytol	Some aspects of plant karyology and karyosystematics.	The significance of the 4C value (where C is the amount of DNA in the unreplicated haploid genome) in angiosperm plants is discussed. The DNA amount is a stable feature used in biosystematics. Although this parameter varies even in closely related taxa, there is no correlation between the DNA amount and the structural and functional organization of plants. The role of DNA amount, including &quot;excess&quot; DNA, in plant evolution is considered. Some rules governing the distribution of DNA amount among different plant taxa are postulated, together with the possibility of using the data in systematics, phylogeny, and solutions of problems of genetic apparatus organization and evolution. The decrease in DNA value per genome during plant evolution and the high level of species formation in taxa with large DNA values have been shown. Plant taxa with a small DNA value per genome have a high percentage and higher degree of polyploidy. The nature of the differential staining of euchromatin and heterochromatin bands of prophase and metaphase chromosomes is also discussed. Data that could explain the mechanism of heterochromatin visualization under cold pretreatment of cells are reviewed. Phenomena involved in the arrangement of chromocenters in interphase nuclei and chromosomes in metaphase during consecutive cell generations are discussed.
10629643	2	2000	Anticancer Res	Prognostic factors in oral squamous cell carcinoma. A review of the literature.	Despite diagnostic and therapeutic progress, the overall prognosis of oral squamous cell carcinoma remains poor and prognostic information is essential for the evaluation and optimal treatment of patients. The prognosis of oral carcinoma depends primarily on clinicopathological factors, that however, have showed a limited predictive value for the identification of patients with high risk of disease relapse. In recent years, the analysis of DNA ploidy, cellular proliferation and oncogenes amplification have been used in attempt to identify new prognostic indicators. The review of the literature shows that TNM stage, tumor grading evaluated at the deep invasive margins and maximal tumor thickness effect on the prognosis. Moreover, the assessment of DNA ploidy and proliferative activity can be used to obtain additional prognostic informations. In contrast, additional studies are needed to understand the prognostic value of oncogenes expression in oral carcinoma.
11093578	0	2000	Membr Cell Biol	Activation of latent nucleolus organizers induced by experimental polyploidization in cells of hexaploid wheat Triticum aestivum L.	The effect of prolonged colchicine-induced polyploidization on activation of latent nucleolus-organizing regions (NOR) of chromosomes was studied in diploid meristematic cells and polyploid root cells of Triticum aestivum L. It has been shown that control diploid and tetraploid cells have maximal number of nucleoli equal to four, which corresponds to the number of nucleolar chromosomes (NC) with active (visualized by staining with AgNO3) NOR (two pairs of homologous chromosomes 1B and 6B). Treatment of wheat seedlings with colchicine for 30 h results in following changes in polyploid cells: (1) impregnation of NOR with silver is observed on homologues of either chromosomes 1A or 5D in all tetraploid metaphase plates (4n, 2x, 4c), which is indicative of the NOR activation on this chromosome in pre-mitotic polyploid interphase; (2) In tetraploid metaphase, NOR in all four homologues of activated chromosomes or in only two of them may be stained; (3) maximal number of nucleoli in tetraploid nuclei is increased till 12, which confirms activation of transcription of additional rRNA gene clusters in polyploids; (4) activation of the rRNA gene expression is induced by the cell polyploidization rather than by colchicine, since in the colchicine-treated diploid cells both maximal number of nucleoli and the number of metaphase chromosomes with active NOR is not changed as compared with control. The obtained data allow us to suggest that structural &quot;separation&quot; of NC in polyploid nuclei stimulates activation of latent NOR.
10743001	0	2000	Rev Neurol	[The genetics of type 1 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, the hereditary focal neuropathies and the hereditary distal motor neuropathies].	INTRODUCTION: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTD) or hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy shows great genetic heterogeneity. The type 1 (CMT-1) or demyelinating form and the type 2 (CMT-2) or neuronal form are two clinically and genetically distinct forms.DEVELOPMENT: Apart from the above mentioned motor and sensory forms, there is another type of neuropathy in which the clinical and neurophysiological involvement is exclusively motor and is known as distal spinal atrophy or hereditary distal motor neuropathy (HDMN), which is a syndrome to be included among the CMTD. The CMT-1 is the most prevalent form and the best understood from the genetic point of view. At least four genes have been reported to be involved: the gene for 22 kDa peripheral myelin protein (PMP-22), situated on the 17p11.2 chromosome (locus CMT-1A); the gene for myelin 0 protein situated on chromosome 1q23 (locus CMT-1B); the gene for conexine 32 (Cx32), found on chromosome Xq13 (locus CMT-X) and the gene EGR2 found on chromosome 10q21.1-q22.1. The genes PMP-22 and PO are related to autosomal dominant forms, the gene Cx32 is transmitted linked to chromosome X and transmission of gene EGR2 has been shown in both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive forms. In the demyelinating forms with autosomal recessive inheritance, positive linkage has been found on four different loci: 8q21.1 (CMT-4A), 11q23 (CMT-4B), 5q23-33 (CMT-4C) and 8q24 in a form related to deafness (CMT-Lom). Two loci have been identified for the autosomal dominant forms of the HDMN. A large family initially and predominantly of the upper limbs is mapped on chromosome 7p (HDMN-V) and another with the classical phenotype mapped on chromosome 12q24. In the familial neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies in most families, deletion of the locus CMT-1A was found, and in rare cases mutation precisely of the PMP-22 gene. In familial amyotrophic neuralgia, genetic molecular analysis has shown linkage with markers on the chromosome 17q24-25.
