PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
25650959	1	2015	Genome Biol	Global mRNA selection mechanisms for translation initiation.	BACKGROUND: The selection and regulation of individual mRNAs for translation initiation from a competing pool of mRNA are poorly understood processes. The closed loop complex, comprising eIF4E, eIF4G and PABP, and its regulation by 4E-BPs are perceived to be key players. Using RIP-seq, we aimed to evaluate the role in gene regulation of the closed loop complex and 4E-BP regulation across the entire yeast transcriptome.RESULTS: We find that there are distinct populations of mRNAs with coherent properties: one mRNA pool contains many ribosomal protein mRNAs and is enriched specifically with all of the closed loop translation initiation components. This class likely represents mRNAs that rely heavily on the closed loop complex for protein synthesis. Other heavily translated mRNAs are apparently under-represented with most closed loop components except Pab1p. Combined with data showing a close correlation between Pab1p interaction and levels of translation, these data suggest that Pab1p is important for the translation of these mRNAs in a closed loop independent manner. We also identify a translational regulatory mechanism for the 4E-BPs; these appear to self-regulate by inhibiting translation initiation of their own mRNAs.CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we show that mRNA selection for translation initiation is not as uniformly regimented as previously anticipated. Components of the closed loop complex are highly relevant for many mRNAs, but some heavily translated mRNAs interact poorly with this machinery. Therefore, alternative, possibly Pab1p-dependent mechanisms likely exist to load ribosomes effectively onto mRNAs. Finally, these studies identify and characterize a complex self-regulatory circuit for the yeast 4E-BPs.
25569619	1	2015	PLoS Genet	The yeast La related protein Slf1p is a key activator of translation during the oxidative stress response.	The mechanisms by which RNA-binding proteins control the translation of subsets of mRNAs are not yet clear. Slf1p and Sro9p are atypical-La motif containing proteins which are members of a superfamily of RNA-binding proteins conserved in eukaryotes. RIP-Seq analysis of these two yeast proteins identified overlapping and distinct sets of mRNA targets, including highly translated mRNAs such as those encoding ribosomal proteins. In paralell, transcriptome analysis of slf1Δ and sro9Δ mutant strains indicated altered gene expression in similar functional classes of mRNAs following loss of each factor. The loss of SLF1 had a greater impact on the transcriptome, and in particular, revealed changes in genes involved in the oxidative stress response. slf1Δ cells are more sensitive to oxidants and RIP-Seq analysis of oxidatively stressed cells enriched Slf1p targets encoding antioxidants and other proteins required for oxidant tolerance. To quantify these effects at the protein level, we used label-free mass spectrometry to compare the proteomes of wild-type and slf1Δ strains following oxidative stress. This analysis identified several proteins which are normally induced in response to hydrogen peroxide, but where this increase is attenuated in the slf1Δ mutant. Importantly, a significant number of the mRNAs encoding these targets were also identified as Slf1p-mRNA targets. We show that Slf1p remains associated with the few translating ribosomes following hydrogen peroxide stress and that Slf1p co-immunoprecipitates ribosomes and members of the eIF4E/eIF4G/Pab1p 'closed loop' complex suggesting that Slf1p interacts with actively translated mRNAs following stress. Finally, mutational analysis of SLF1 revealed a novel ribosome interacting domain in Slf1p, independent of its RNA binding La-motif. Together, our results indicate that Slf1p mediates a translational response to oxidative stress via mRNA-specific translational control.
26162078	0	2015	PLoS One	Transcriptomic-Wide Discovery of Direct and Indirect HuR RNA Targets in Activated CD4+ T Cells.	Due to poor correlation between steady state mRNA levels and protein product, purely transcriptomic profiling methods may miss genes posttranscriptionally regulated by RNA binding proteins (RBPs) and microRNAs (miRNAs). RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) methods developed to identify in vivo targets of RBPs have greatly elucidated those mRNAs which may be regulated via transcript stability and translation. The RBP HuR (ELAVL1) and family members are major stabilizers of mRNA. Many labs have identified HuR mRNA targets; however, many of these analyses have been performed in cell lines and oftentimes are not independent biological replicates. Little is known about how HuR target mRNAs behave in conditional knock-out models. In the present work, we performed HuR RIP-Seq and RNA-Seq to investigate HuR direct and indirect targets using a novel conditional knock-out model of HuR genetic ablation during CD4+ T activation and Th2 differentiation. Using independent biological replicates, we generated a high coverage RIP-Seq data set (&gt;160 million reads) that was analyzed using bioinformatics methods specifically designed to find direct mRNA targets in RIP-Seq data. Simultaneously, another set of independent biological replicates were sequenced by RNA-Seq (&gt;425 million reads) to identify indirect HuR targets. These direct and indirect targets were combined to determine canonical pathways in CD4+ T cell activation and differentiation for which HuR plays an important role. We show that HuR may regulate genes in multiple canonical pathways involved in T cell activation especially the CD28 family signaling pathway. These data provide insights into potential HuR-regulated genes during T cell activation and immune mechanisms.
26149387	0	2015	Mol Cell Biol	LIN28A modulates splicing and gene expression programs in breast cancer cells.	LIN28 is an evolutionarily conserved RNA-binding protein with critical functions in developmental timing and cancer. However molecular mechanisms underlying LIN28's oncogenic properties are yet to be described. RIP-Seq analysis revealed significant LIN28 binding within 843 mRNAs in breast cancer cells. Many of the LIN28 bound mRNAs are implicated in the regulation of RNA and cell metabolism. We identify heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 (hnRNP A1), a protein with multiple roles in mRNA metabolism, as a LIN28 interacting partner. Subsequently, we use a custom computational method to identify differentially spliced gene isoforms in LIN28 and hnRNP A1 siRNA-treated cells. Results reveal these proteins regulate alternative splicing and steady state mRNA expression of genes implicated in aspects of breast cancer biology. Notably, cells lacking LIN28 undergo significant isoform switching of the ENAH gene, resulting in a decrease in the expression of ENAH exon 11a isoform. Expression of ENAH isoform 11a has been shown to be elevated in breast cancers that express HER2. Intriguingly, analysis of publicly available TCGA array data reveals LIN28 expression is significantly different in HER2 compared to other breast cancer subtypes. Collectively, our data suggests that LIN28 may regulate splicing and gene expression programs that drive breast cancer subtype phenotypes.
26070955	0	2015	BMC Genomics	deGPS is a powerful tool for detecting differential expression in RNA-sequencing studies.	BACKGROUND: The advent of the NGS technologies has permitted profiling of whole-genome transcriptomes (i.e., RNA-Seq) at unprecedented speed and very low cost. RNA-Seq provides a far more precise measurement of transcript levels and their isoforms compared to other methods such as microarrays. A fundamental goal of RNA-Seq is to better identify expression changes between different biological or disease conditions. However, existing methods for detecting differential expression from RNA-Seq count data have not been comprehensively evaluated in large-scale RNA-Seq datasets. Many of them suffer from inflation of type I error and failure in controlling false discovery rate especially in the presence of abnormal high sequence read counts in RNA-Seq experiments.RESULTS: To address these challenges, we propose a powerful and robust tool, termed deGPS, for detecting differential expression in RNA-Seq data. This framework contains new normalization methods based on generalized Poisson distribution modeling sequence count data, followed by permutation-based differential expression tests. We systematically evaluated our new tool in simulated datasets from several large-scale TCGA RNA-Seq projects, unbiased benchmark data from compcodeR package, and real RNA-Seq data from the development transcriptome of Drosophila. deGPS can precisely control type I error and false discovery rate for the detection of differential expression and is robust in the presence of abnormal high sequence read counts in RNA-Seq experiments.CONCLUSIONS: Software implementing our deGPS was released within an R package with parallel computations ( https://github.com/LL-LAB-MCW/deGPS ). deGPS is a powerful and robust tool for data normalization and detecting different expression in RNA-Seq experiments. Beyond RNA-Seq, deGPS has the potential to significantly enhance future data analysis efforts from many other high-throughput platforms such as ChIP-Seq, MBD-Seq and RIP-Seq.
26054396	0	2015	Genome Biol	Drosophila Imp iCLIP identifies an RNA assemblage coordinating F-actin formation.	BACKGROUND: Post-transcriptional RNA regulons ensure coordinated expression of monocistronic mRNAs encoding functionally related proteins. In this study, we employ a combination of RIP-seq and short- and long-wave individual-nucleotide resolution crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) technologies in Drosophila cells to identify transcripts associated with cytoplasmic ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) containing the RNA-binding protein Imp.RESULTS: We find extensive binding of Imp to 3' UTRs of transcripts that are involved in F-actin formation. A common denominator of the RNA-protein interface is the presence of multiple motifs with a central UA-rich element flanked by CA-rich elements. Experiments in single cells and intact flies reveal compromised actin cytoskeletal dynamics associated with low Imp levels. The former shows reduced F-actin formation and the latter exhibits abnormal neuronal patterning. This demonstrates a physiological significance of the defined RNA regulon.CONCLUSIONS: Our data imply that Drosophila Imp RNPs may function as cytoplasmic mRNA assemblages that encode proteins which participate in actin cytoskeletal remodeling. Thus, they may facilitate coordinated protein expression in sub-cytoplasmic locations such as growth cones.
25848059	0	2015	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Potential role for snoRNAs in PKR activation during metabolic stress.	Protein kinase RNA-activated (PKR) has long been known to be activated by viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) as part of the mammalian immune response. However, in mice PKR is also activated by metabolic stress in the absence of viral infection, and this requires a functional kinase domain, as well as a functional dsRNA-binding domain. The endogenous cellular RNA that potentially leads to PKR activation during metabolic stress is unknown. We investigated this question using mouse embryonic fibroblast cells expressing wild-type PKR (PKRWT) or PKR with a point mutation in each dsRNA-binding motif (PKRRM). Using this system, we identified endogenous RNA that interacts with PKR after induction of metabolic stress by palmitic acid (PA) treatment. Specifically, RIP-Seq analyses showed that the majority of enriched RNAs that interacted with WT PKR (≥twofold, false discovery rate ≤ 5%) were small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs). Immunoprecipitation of PKR in extracts of UV-cross-linked cells, followed by RT-qPCR, confirmed that snoRNAs were enriched in PKRWT samples after PA treatment, but not in the PKRRM samples. We also demonstrated that a subset of identified snoRNAs bind and activate PKR in vitro; the presence of a 5'-triphosphate enhanced PKR activity compared with the activity with a 5'-monophosphate, for some, but not all, snoRNAs. Finally, we demonstrated PKR activation in cells upon snoRNA transfection, supporting our hypothesis that endogenous snoRNAs can activate PKR. Our results suggest an unprecedented and unexpected model whereby snoRNAs play a role in the activation of PKR under metabolic stress.
25827894	0	2015	Methods Mol Biol	Transcriptome-wide identification of in vivo interactions between RNAs and RNA-binding proteins by RIP and PAR-CLIP assays.	Comprehensive genomic and computational studies in the era of high-throughput sequencing revealed that the major proportion of the human genome is transcribed. This novel insight confronted the scientific community with new questions concerning the expanded role of RNA, especially noncoding RNA (ncRNA), in cellular pathways. In recent years, there has been mounting evidence that ncRNAs and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) are involved in a wide range of biological processes, such as developmental transitions, cell differentiation, stress response, genome organization, and regulation of gene expression. In particular, in the chromatin field long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have drawn increasing attention to their function in epigenetic regulation due to the fact that they were found to interact with multiple chromatin regulators and modifiers. Recently, techniques to study the extent of RNA-protein interactions have been developed in many research laboratories. Here we describe protocols for RNA Immunoprecipitation-Sequencing (RIP-Seq) and Photoactivatable-Ribonucleoside-Enhanced Cross-linking and Immunoprecipitation combined with deep sequencing (PAR-CLIP-Seq) to identify RNA targets of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) on a transcriptome-wide level, discussing advantages and drawbacks.
25577386	0	2015	Methods Mol Biol	RIP-Seq data analysis to determine RNA-protein associations.	Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have opened new avenues of unprecedented power for research in molecular biology and genetics. In particular, their application to the study of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), extracted through immunoprecipitation (RIP), permits to sequence and characterize all RNAs that were found to be bound in vivo by a given RBP (RIP-Seq). On the other hand, NGS-based experiments, including RIP-Seq, produce millions of short sequence fragments that have to be processed with suitable bioinformatic tools and methods to recover and/or quantify the original sequence sample. In this chapter we provide a survey of different approaches that can be taken for the analysis of RIP-Seq data and the identification of the RNAs bound by a given RBP.
25184677	5	2014	Genes Dev	A post-translational regulatory switch on UPF1 controls targeted mRNA degradation.	Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) controls the quality of eukaryotic gene expression and also degrades physiologic mRNAs. How NMD targets are identified is incompletely understood. A central NMD factor is the ATP-dependent RNA helicase upframeshift 1 (UPF1). Neither the distance in space between the termination codon and the poly(A) tail nor the binding of steady-state, largely hypophosphorylated UPF1 is a discriminating marker of cellular NMD targets, unlike for premature termination codon (PTC)-containing reporter mRNAs when compared with their PTC-free counterparts. Here, we map phosphorylated UPF1 (p-UPF1)-binding sites using transcriptome-wide footprinting or DNA oligonucleotide-directed mRNA cleavage to report that p-UPF1 provides the first reliable cellular NMD target marker. p-UPF1 is enriched on NMD target 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) along with suppressor with morphogenic effect on genitalia 5 (SMG5) and SMG7 but not SMG1 or SMG6. Immunoprecipitations of UPF1 variants deficient in various aspects of the NMD process in parallel with Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) experiments reveal that ATPase/helicase-deficient UPF1 manifests high levels of RNA binding and disregulated hyperphosphorylation, whereas wild-type UPF1 releases from nonspecific RNA interactions in an ATP hydrolysis-dependent mechanism until an NMD target is identified. 3' UTR-associated UPF1 undergoes regulated phosphorylation on NMD targets, providing a binding platform for mRNA degradative activities. p-UPF1 binding to NMD target 3' UTRs is stabilized by SMG5 and SMG7. Our results help to explain why steady-state UPF1 binding is not a marker for cellular NMD substrates and how this binding is transformed to induce mRNA decay.
24393626	5	2014	Genome Biol	RIP-seq analysis of eukaryotic Sm proteins identifies three major categories of Sm-containing ribonucleoproteins.	BACKGROUND: Sm proteins are multimeric RNA-binding factors, found in all three domains of life. Eukaryotic Sm proteins, together with their associated RNAs, form small ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes important in multiple aspects of gene regulation. Comprehensive knowledge of the RNA components of Sm RNPs is critical for understanding their functions.RESULTS: We developed a multi-targeting RNA-immunoprecipitation sequencing (RIP-seq) strategy to reliably identify Sm-associated RNAs from Drosophila ovaries and cultured human cells. Using this method, we discovered three major categories of Sm-associated transcripts: small nuclear (sn)RNAs, small Cajal body (sca)RNAs and mRNAs. Additional RIP-PCR analysis showed both ubiquitous and tissue-specific interactions. We provide evidence that the mRNA-Sm interactions are mediated by snRNPs, and that one of the mechanisms of interaction is via base pairing. Moreover, the Sm-associated mRNAs are mature, indicating a splicing-independent function for Sm RNPs.CONCLUSIONS: This study represents the first comprehensive analysis of eukaryotic Sm-containing RNPs, and provides a basis for additional functional analyses of Sm proteins and their associated snRNPs outside of the context of pre-mRNA splicing. Our findings expand the repertoire of eukaryotic Sm-containing RNPs and suggest new functions for snRNPs in mRNA metabolism.
24502796	3	2014	Biotechniques	Library construction for next-generation sequencing: overviews and challenges.	High-throughput sequencing, also known as next-generation sequencing (NGS), has revolutionized genomic research. In recent years, NGS technology has steadily improved, with costs dropping and the number and range of sequencing applications increasing exponentially. Here, we examine the critical role of sequencing library quality and consider important challenges when preparing NGS libraries from DNA and RNA sources. Factors such as the quantity and physical characteristics of the RNA or DNA source material as well as the desired application (i.e., genome sequencing, targeted sequencing, RNA-seq, ChIP-seq, RIP-seq, and methylation) are addressed in the context of preparing high quality sequencing libraries. In addition, the current methods for preparing NGS libraries from single cells are also discussed.
25474150	1	2014	PLoS Genet	RAN-binding protein 9 is involved in alternative splicing and is critical for male germ cell development and male fertility.	As a member of the large Ran-binding protein family, Ran-binding protein 9 (RANBP9) has been suggested to play a critical role in diverse cellular functions in somatic cell lineages in vitro, and this is further supported by the neonatal lethality phenotype in Ranbp9 global knockout mice. However, the exact molecular actions of RANBP9 remain largely unknown. By inactivation of Ranbp9 specifically in testicular somatic and spermatogenic cells, we discovered that Ranbp9 was dispensable for Sertoli cell development and functions, but critical for male germ cell development and male fertility. RIP-Seq and proteomic analyses revealed that RANBP9 was associated with multiple key splicing factors and directly targeted &gt;2,300 mRNAs in spermatocytes and round spermatids. Many of the RANBP9 target and non-target mRNAs either displayed aberrant splicing patterns or were dysregulated in the absence of Ranbp9. Our data uncovered a novel role of Ranbp9 in regulating alternative splicing in spermatogenic cells, which is critical for normal spermatogenesis and male fertility.
25330313	1	2014	PLoS One	Profound impact of Hfq on nutrient acquisition, metabolism and motility in the plant pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens.	As matchmaker between mRNA and sRNA interactions, the RNA chaperone Hfq plays a key role in riboregulation of many bacteria. Often, the global influence of Hfq on the transcriptome is reflected by substantially altered proteomes and pleiotropic phenotypes in hfq mutants. Using quantitative proteomics and co-immunoprecipitation combined with RNA-sequencing (RIP-seq) of Hfq-bound RNAs, we demonstrate the pervasive role of Hfq in nutrient acquisition, metabolism and motility of the plant pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens. 136 of 2544 proteins identified by iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) were affected in the absence of Hfq. Most of them were associated with ABC transporters, general metabolism and motility. RIP-seq of chromosomally encoded Hfq3xFlag revealed 1697 mRNAs and 209 non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) associated with Hfq. 56 ncRNAs were previously undescribed. Interestingly, 55% of the Hfq-bound ncRNAs were encoded antisense (as) to a protein-coding sequence suggesting that A. tumefaciens Hfq plays an important role in asRNA-target interactions. The exclusive enrichment of 296 mRNAs and 31 ncRNAs under virulence conditions further indicates a role for post-transcriptional regulation in A. tumefaciens-mediated plant infection. On the basis of the iTRAQ and RIP-seq data, we assembled a comprehensive model of the Hfq core regulon in A. tumefaciens.
24096052	6	2013	Methods	RIPiT-Seq: a high-throughput approach for footprinting RNA:protein complexes.	Development of high-throughput approaches to map the RNA interaction sites of individual RNA binding proteins (RBPs) transcriptome-wide is rapidly transforming our understanding of post-transcriptional gene regulatory mechanisms. Here we describe a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) footprinting approach we recently developed for identifying occupancy sites of both individual RBPs and multi-subunit RNP complexes. RNA:protein immunoprecipitation in tandem (RIPiT) yields highly specific RNA footprints of cellular RNPs isolated via two sequential purifications; the resulting RNA footprints can then be identified by high-throughput sequencing (Seq). RIPiT-Seq is broadly applicable to all RBPs regardless of their RNA binding mode and thus provides a means to map the RNA binding sites of RBPs with poor inherent ultraviolet (UV) crosslinkability. Further, among current high-throughput approaches, RIPiT has the unique capacity to differentiate binding sites of RNPs with overlapping protein composition. It is therefore particularly suited for studying dynamic RNP assemblages whose composition evolves as gene expression proceeds.
23519609	6	2013	Nucleic Acids Res	Characterizing TDP-43 interaction with its RNA targets.	One of the most important functional features of nuclear factor TDP-43 is its ability to bind UG-repeats with high efficiency. Several cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) and RNA immunoprecipitation-sequencing (RIP-seq) analyses have indicated that TDP-43 in vivo can also specifically bind loosely conserved UG/GU-rich repeats interspersed by other nucleotides. These sequences are predominantly localized within long introns and in the 3'UTR of various genes. Most importantly, some of these sequences have been found to exist in the 3'UTR region of TDP-43 itself. In the TDP-43 3'UTR context, the presence of these UG-like sequences is essential for TDP-43 to autoregulate its own levels through a negative feedback loop. In this work, we have compared the binding of TDP-43 with these types of sequences as opposed to perfect UG-stretches. We show that the binding affinity to the UG-like sequences has a dissociation constant (Kd) of ∼110 nM compared with a Kd of 8 nM for straight UGs, and have mapped the region of contact between protein and RNA. In addition, our results indicate that the local concentration of UG dinucleotides in the CLIP sequences is one of the major factors influencing the interaction of these RNA sequences with TDP-43.
23455476	6	2013	Nucleic Acids Res	RIPSeeker: a statistical package for identifying protein-associated transcripts from RIP-seq experiments.	RIP-seq has recently been developed to discover genome-wide RNA transcripts that interact with a protein or protein complex. RIP-seq is similar to both RNA-seq and ChIP-seq, but presents unique properties and challenges. Currently, no statistical tool is dedicated to RIP-seq analysis. We developed RIPSeeker (http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/2.12/bioc/html/RIPSeeker.html), a free open-source Bioconductor/R package for de novo RIP peak predictions based on HMM. To demonstrate the utility of the software package, we applied RIPSeeker and six other published programs to three independent RIP-seq datasets and two PAR-CLIP datasets corresponding to six distinct RNA-binding proteins. Based on receiver operating curves, RIPSeeker demonstrates superior sensitivity and specificity in discriminating high-confidence peaks that are consistently agreed on among a majority of the comparison methods, and dominated 9 of the 12 evaluations, averaging 80% area under the curve. The peaks from RIPSeeker are further confirmed based on their significant enrichment for biologically meaningful genomic elements, published sequence motifs and association with canonical transcripts known to interact with the proteins examined. While RIPSeeker is specifically tailored for RIP-seq data analysis, it also provides a suite of bioinformatics tools integrated within a self-contained software package comprehensively addressing issues ranging from post-alignments' processing to visualization and annotation.
23917615	5	2013	EMBO Rep	Messenger RNA is a functional component of a chromatin insulator complex.	Chromatin insulators are DNA protein complexes situated throughout the genome capable of demarcating independent transcriptional domains. Previous studies point to an important role for RNA in gypsy chromatin insulator function in Drosophila; however, the identity of these putative insulator-associated RNAs is not currently known. Here we utilize RNA-immunoprecipitation and high throughput sequencing (RIP-seq) to isolate RNAs stably associated with gypsy insulator complexes. Strikingly, these RNAs correspond to specific sense-strand, spliced and polyadenylated mRNAs, including two insulator protein transcripts. In order to assess the functional significance of these associated mRNAs independent of their coding function, we expressed untranslatable versions of these transcripts in developing flies and observed both alteration of insulator complex nuclear localization as well as improvement of enhancer-blocking activity. Together, these data suggest a novel, noncoding mechanism by which certain mRNAs contribute to chromatin insulator function.
23939471	4	2013	Gene	Screening for possible miRNA-mRNA associations in a colon cancer cell line.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs mediating the regulation of gene expression in various biological contexts, including carcinogenesis. Here, we screened putative associations between 34, 45, and 103 miRNAs and 164, 391, and 81 mRNAs via Argonaute1 (Ago1) or Ago2 immunoprecipitation (IP) experiments in a colon cancer cell line. We used a combination of RIP Seq analysis. RNAs that were co-immunoprecipitated with Ago1 or Ago2 were used for massively parallel small RNA and mRNA sequencing. The detected miRNAs and mRNAs were further associated with one another based on in silico target predictions. Analysis of the putative associations indicated that, although Ago1 and Ago2 shared a similar repertory of miRNAs, the mRNAs possibly regulated by those miRNAs seemed different. The mRNAs detected with Ago1 IP were indicated to be frequently associated with genes having constitutive cellular functions, regulated by a smaller number of miRNAs, and appeared to receive more stringent translational regulation. In contrast, putative miRNA-mRNA associations detected with Ago2 IP appeared to be related to signal transduction genes, which had a larger number of possible miRNA binding sites. We then conducted a similar analysis using the colon cancer cells cultured under hypoxia and identified potential hypoxia-induced miRNA-mRNA associations, which included several well-characterized cancer-related genes as novel putative miRNA targets.
23929032	2	2013	Bioinformatics	ASPeak: an abundance sensitive peak detection algorithm for RIP-Seq.	SUMMARY: Unlike DNA, RNA abundances can vary over several orders of magnitude. Thus, identification of RNA-protein binding sites from high-throughput sequencing data presents unique challenges. Although peak identification in ChIP-Seq data has been extensively explored, there are few bioinformatics tools tailored for peak calling on analogous datasets for RNA-binding proteins. Here we describe ASPeak (abundance sensitive peak detection algorithm), an implementation of an algorithm that we previously applied to detect peaks in exon junction complex RNA immunoprecipitation in tandem experiments. Our peak detection algorithm yields stringent and robust target sets enabling sensitive motif finding and downstream functional analyses.AVAILABILITY: ASPeak is implemented in Perl as a complete pipeline that takes bedGraph files as input. ASPeak implementation is freely available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/as-peak under the GNU General Public License. ASPeak can be run on a personal computer, yet is designed to be easily parallelizable. ASPeak can also run on high performance computing clusters providing efficient speedup. The documentation and user manual can be obtained from http://master.dl.sourceforge.net/project/as-peak/manual.pdf.
24257445	1	2013	Methods	Profiling post-transcriptionally networked mRNA subsets using RIP-Chip and RIP-Seq.	Post-transcriptional regulation of messenger RNA contributes to numerous aspects of gene expression. The key component to this level of regulation is the interaction of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and their associated target mRNA. Splicing, stability, localization, translational efficiency, and alternate codon use are just some of the post-transcriptional processes regulated by RBPs. Central to our understanding of these processes is the need to characterize the network of RBP-mRNA associations and create a map of this functional post-transcriptional regulatory system. Here we provide a detailed methodology for mRNA isolation using RBP immunoprecipitation (RIP) as a primary partitioning approach followed by microarray (Chip) or next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis. We do this by using specific antibodies to target RBPs for the capture of associated RNA cargo. RIP-Chip/Seq has proven to be is a versatile, genomic technique that has been widely used to study endogenous RBP-RNA associations.
23673373	1	2013	RNA Biol	Genome-wide identification of translationally inhibited and degraded miR-155 targets using RNA-interacting protein-IP.	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are single-stranded, small, non-coding RNAs, which fine-tune protein expression by degrading and/or translationally inhibiting mRNAs. Manipulation of miRNA expression in animal models frequently results in severe phenotypes indicating their relevance in controlling cellular functions, most likely by interacting with multiple targets. To better understand the effect of miRNA activities, genome-wide analysis of their targets are required. MicroRNA profiling as well as transcriptome analysis upon enforced miRNA expression were frequently used to investigate their relevance. However, these approaches often fail to identify relevant miRNAs targets. Therefore, we tested the precision of RNA-interacting protein immunoprecipitation (RIP) using AGO2-specific antibodies, a core component of the &quot;RNA-induced silencing complex&quot; (RISC), followed by RNA sequencing (Seq) in a defined cellular system, the HEK293T cells with stable, ectopic expression of miR-155. Thereby, we identified 100 AGO2-associated mRNAs in miR-155-expressing cells, of which 67 were in silico predicted miR-155 target genes. An integrated analysis of the corresponding expression profiles indicated that these targets were either regulated by mRNA decay or by translational repression. Of the identified miR-155 targets, 17 were related to cell cycle control, suggesting their involvement in the observed increase in cell proliferation of HEK293T cells upon miR-155 expression. Additional, secondary changes within the gene expression profile were detected and might contribute to this phenotype as well. Interestingly, by analyzing RIP-Seq data of HEK-293T cells and two B-cell lines we identified a recurrent disproportional enrichment of several miRNAs, including miR-155 and miRNAs of the miR-17-92 cluster, in the AGO2-associated precipitates, suggesting discrepancies in miRNA expression and activity.
24074203	0	2013	BMC Genomics	RIP-seq of BmAgo2-associated small RNAs reveal various types of small non-coding RNAs in the silkworm, Bombyx mori.	BACKGROUND: Small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are important regulators of gene expression in eukaryotes. Previously, only microRNAs (miRNAs) and piRNAs have been identified in the silkworm, Bombyx mori. Furthermore, only ncRNAs (50-500nt) of intermediate size have been systematically identified in the silkworm.RESULTS: Here, we performed a systematic identification and analysis of small RNAs (18-50nt) associated with the Bombyx mori argonaute2 (BmAgo2) protein. Using RIP-seq, we identified various types of small ncRNAs associated with BmAGO2. These ncRNAs showed a multimodal length distribution, with three peaks at ~20nt, ~27nt and ~33nt, which included tRNA-, transposable element (TE)-, rRNA-, snoRNA- and snRNA-derived small RNAs as well as miRNAs and piRNAs. The tRNA-derived fragments (tRFs) were found at an extremely high abundance and accounted for 69.90% of the BmAgo2-associated small RNAs. Northern blotting confirmed that many tRFs were expressed or up-regulated only in the BmNPV-infected cells, implying that the tRFs play a prominent role by binding to BmAgo2 during BmNPV infection. Additional evidence suggested that there are potential cleavage sites on the D, anti-codon and TψC loops of the tRNAs. TE-derived small RNAs and piRNAs also accounted for a significant proportion of the BmAgo2-associated small RNAs, suggesting that BmAgo2 could be involved in the maintenance of genome stability by suppressing the activities of transposons guided by these small RNAs. Finally, Northern blotting was also used to confirm the Bombyx 5.8 s rRNA-derived small RNAs, demonstrating that various novel small RNAs exist in the silkworm.CONCLUSIONS: Using an RIP-seq method in combination with Northern blotting, we identified various types of small RNAs associated with the BmAgo2 protein, including tRNA-, TE-, rRNA-, snoRNA- and snRNA-derived small RNAs as well as miRNAs and piRNAs. Our findings provide new clues for future functional studies of the role of small RNAs in insect development and evolution.
23024010	21	2012	Bioinformatics	Site identification in high-throughput RNA-protein interaction data.	MOTIVATION: Post-transcriptional and co-transcriptional regulation is a crucial link between genotype and phenotype. The central players are the RNA-binding proteins, and experimental technologies [such as cross-linking with immunoprecipitation- (CLIP-) and RIP-seq] for probing their activities have advanced rapidly over the course of the past decade. Statistically robust, flexible computational methods for binding site identification from high-throughput immunoprecipitation assays are largely lacking however.RESULTS: We introduce a method for site identification which provides four key advantages over previous methods: (i) it can be applied on all variations of CLIP and RIP-seq technologies, (ii) it accurately models the underlying read-count distributions, (iii) it allows external covariates, such as transcript abundance (which we demonstrate is highly correlated with read count) to inform the site identification process and (iv) it allows for direct comparison of site usage across cell types or conditions.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: We have implemented our method in a software tool called Piranha. Source code and binaries, licensed under the GNU General Public License (version 3) are freely available for download from http://smithlab.usc.edu.CONTACT: andrewds@usc.eduSUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data available at Bioinformatics online.
22575643	4	2012	FEBS Lett	A new function of ROD1 in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.	RNA-binding proteins play a crucial role in the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB in humans) has been extensively characterized as an important splicing factor, and has additional functions in 3' end processing and translation. ROD1 is a PTB paralog containing four RRM (RNA recognition motif) domains. Here, we discover a function of ROD1 in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). We show that ROD1 and the core NMD factor UPF1 interact and co-regulate an extensive number of target genes. Using a reporter system, we demonstrate that ROD1, similarly to UPF1 and UPF2, is required for the destabilization of a known NMD substrate. Finally, we show through RIP-seq that ROD1 and UPF1 associate with a significant number of common transcripts.
22907501	3	2012	Methods Mol Biol	Co-Immunoprecipitation of long noncoding RNAs.	It is now estimated that the human genome encodes thousands of long noncoding (lnc)RNAs. These novel molecules are causing a paradigm shift in the field of molecular biology as a number of lncRNAs have been shown to be involved in a wide range of biological functions including regulation of gene expression. Also, misregulation of lncRNAs has been observed in human diseases such as cancer and neurological disorders. These findings have spurred a huge interest in elucidating the functions and mechanisms of lncRNAs; and therefore, the need for new methods to do so. In this chapter, we discuss RIP-Seq, a method that is utilized to discover the lncRNA partners of a specific protein. This procedure involves immunoprecipitation of a protein from cross-linked cell lysate followed by reverse-cross-linking, isolation, and deep sequencing of RNAs, leading to the identification of all lncRNAs that are associated with a specific protein complex.
22056986	53	2011	Nature	Chromatin-associated RNA interference components contribute to transcriptional regulation in Drosophila.	RNA interference (RNAi) pathways have evolved as important modulators of gene expression that operate in the cytoplasm by degrading RNA target molecules through the activity of short (21-30 nucleotide) RNAs. RNAi components have been reported to have a role in the nucleus, as they are involved in epigenetic regulation and heterochromatin formation. However, although RNAi-mediated post-transcriptional gene silencing is well documented, the mechanisms of RNAi-mediated transcriptional gene silencing and, in particular, the role of RNAi components in chromatin dynamics, especially in animal multicellular organisms, are elusive. Here we show that the key RNAi components Dicer 2 (DCR2) and Argonaute 2 (AGO2) associate with chromatin (with a strong preference for euchromatic, transcriptionally active, loci) and interact with the core transcription machinery. Notably, loss of function of DCR2 or AGO2 showed that transcriptional defects are accompanied by the perturbation of RNA polymerase II positioning on promoters. Furthermore, after heat shock, both Dcr2 and Ago2 null mutations, as well as missense mutations that compromise the RNAi activity, impaired the global dynamics of RNA polymerase II. Finally, the deep sequencing of the AGO2-associated small RNAs (AGO2 RIP-seq) revealed that AGO2 is strongly enriched in small RNAs that encompass the promoter regions and other regions of heat-shock and other genetic loci on both the sense and antisense DNA strands, but with a strong bias for the antisense strand, particularly after heat shock. Taken together, our results show that DCR2 and AGO2 are globally associated with transcriptionally active loci and may have a pivotal role in shaping the transcriptome by controlling the processivity of RNA polymerase II.
21858232	12	2011	PLoS One	Matrin 3 binds and stabilizes mRNA.	Matrin 3 (MATR3) is a highly conserved, inner nuclear matrix protein with two zinc finger domains and two RNA recognition motifs (RRM), whose function is largely unknown. Recently we found MATR3 to be phosphorylated by the protein kinase ATM, which activates the cellular response to double strand breaks in the DNA. Here, we show that MATR3 interacts in an RNA-dependent manner with several proteins with established roles in RNA processing, and maintains its interaction with RNA via its RRM2 domain. Deep sequencing of the bound RNA (RIP-seq) identified several small noncoding RNA species. Using microarray analysis to explore MATR3's role in transcription, we identified 77 transcripts whose amounts depended on the presence of MATR3. We validated this finding with nine transcripts which were also bound to the MATR3 complex. Finally, we demonstrated the importance of MATR3 for maintaining the stability of several of these mRNA species and conclude that it has a role in mRNA stabilization. The data suggest that the cellular level of MATR3, known to be highly regulated, modulates the stability of a group of gene transcripts.
21172659	205	2010	Mol Cell	Genome-wide identification of polycomb-associated RNAs by RIP-seq.	Polycomb proteins play essential roles in stem cell renewal and human disease. Recent studies of HOX genes and X inactivation have provided evidence for RNA cofactors in Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Here we develop a RIP-seq method to capture the PRC2 transcriptome and identify a genome-wide pool of &gt;9000 PRC2-interacting RNAs in embryonic stem cells. The transcriptome includes antisense, intergenic, and promoter-associated transcripts, as well as many unannotated RNAs. A large number of transcripts occur within imprinted regions, oncogene and tumor suppressor loci, and stem cell-related bivalent domains. We provide evidence for direct RNA-protein interactions, most likely via the Ezh2 subunit. We also identify Gtl2 RNA as a PRC2 cofactor that directs PRC2 to the reciprocally imprinted Dlk1 coding gene. Thus, Polycomb proteins interact with a genome-wide family of RNAs, some of which may be used as biomarkers and therapeutic targets for human disease.
21051541	86	2010	J Biol Chem	Identification of neuronal RNA targets of TDP-43-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes.	TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is associated with a spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases. Although TDP-43 resembles heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins, its RNA targets and physiological protein partners remain unknown. Here we identify RNA targets of TDP-43 from cortical neurons by RNA immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing (RIP-seq). The canonical TDP-43 binding site (TG)(n) is 55.1-fold enriched, and moreover, a variant with adenine in the middle, (TG)(n)TA(TG)(m), is highly abundant among reads in our TDP-43 RIP-seq library. TDP-43 RNA targets can be divided into three different groups: those primarily binding in introns, in exons, and across both introns and exons. TDP-43 RNA targets are particularly enriched for Gene Ontology terms related to synaptic function, RNA metabolism, and neuronal development. Furthermore, TDP-43 binds to a number of RNAs encoding for proteins implicated in neurodegeneration, including TDP-43 itself, FUS/TLS, progranulin, Tau, and ataxin 1 and -2. We also identify 25 proteins that co-purify with TDP-43 from rodent brain nuclear extracts. Prominent among them are nuclear proteins involved in pre-mRNA splicing and RNA stability and transport. Also notable are two neuron-enriched proteins, methyl CpG-binding protein 2 and polypyrimidine tract-binding protein 2 (PTBP2). A PTBP2 consensus RNA binding motif is enriched in the TDP-43 RIP-seq library, suggesting that PTBP2 may co-regulate TDP-43 RNA targets. This work thus reveals the protein and RNA components of the TDP-43-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes and provides a framework for understanding how dysregulation of TDP-43 in RNA metabolism contributes to neurodegeneration.
