PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
25751625	2	2015	Nat Genet	Genome-wide association analysis of more than 120,000 individuals identifies 15 new susceptibility loci for breast cancer.	Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and large-scale replication studies have identified common variants in 79 loci associated with breast cancer, explaining ∼14% of the familial risk of the disease. To identify new susceptibility loci, we performed a meta-analysis of 11 GWAS, comprising 15,748 breast cancer cases and 18,084 controls together with 46,785 cases and 42,892 controls from 41 studies genotyped on a 211,155-marker custom array (iCOGS). Analyses were restricted to women of European ancestry. We generated genotypes for more than 11 million SNPs by imputation using the 1000 Genomes Project reference panel, and we identified 15 new loci associated with breast cancer at P &lt; 5 × 10(-8). Combining association analysis with ChIP-seq chromatin binding data in mammary cell lines and ChIA-PET chromatin interaction data from ENCODE, we identified likely target genes in two regions: SETBP1 at 18q12.3 and RNF115 and PDZK1 at 1q21.1. One association appears to be driven by an amino acid substitution encoded in EXO1.
25563301	1	2015	BMC Genomics	Chromatin Interaction Analysis with Paired-End Tag (ChIA-PET) sequencing technology and application.	BACKGROUND: Long-range chromatin interactions play an important role in transcription regulation. Chromatin Interaction Analysis with Paired-End-Tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) is an emerging technology that has unique advantages in chromatin interaction analysis, and thus provides insight into the study of transcription regulation.RESULTS: This article introduces the experimental protocol and data analysis process of ChIA-PET, as well as discusses some applications using this technology. It also unveils the direction of future studies based on this technology.CONCLUSIONS: Overall we show that ChIA-PET is the cornerstone to explore the three-dimensional (3D) chromatin structure, and certainly will lead the forthcoming wave of 3D genomics studies.
26059817	0	2015	J Cell Physiol	C-ing the Genome: A Compendium of Chromosome Conformation Capture Methods to Study Higher-Order Chromatin Organization.	Three-dimensional organization of the chromatin has important roles in transcription, replication, DNA repair, and pathologic events such as translocations. There are two fundamental ways to study higher-order chromatin organization: microscopic and molecular approaches. In this review, we briefly introduce the molecular approaches, focusing on chromosome conformation capture or&quot;3C&quot; technology and its derivatives, which can be used to probe chromatin folding at resolutions beyond that provided by microscopy techniques. We further discuss the different types of data generated by the 3C-based methods and how they can be used to answer distinct biological questions. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
26034063	0	2015	Bioinformatics	Mango: a bias-correcting ChIA-PET analysis pipeline.	MOTIVATION: Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired-End Tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) is an established method for detecting genome-wide looping interactions at high resolution. Current ChIA-PET analysis software packages either fail to correct for non-specific interactions due to genomic proximity or only address a fraction of the steps required for data processing. We present Mango, a complete ChIA-PET data analysis pipeline that provides statistical confidence estimates for interactions and corrects for major sources of bias including differential peak enrichment and genomic proximity.RESULTS: Comparison to the existing software packages, ChIA-PET Tool and ChiaSig revealed that Mango interactions exhibit much better agreement with high-resolution Hi-C data. Importantly, Mango executes all steps required for processing ChIA-PET datasets, whereas ChiaSig only completes 20% of the required steps. Application of Mango to multiple available ChIA-PET datasets permitted the independent rediscovery of known trends in chromatin loops including enrichment of CTCF, RAD21, SMC3 and ZNF143 at the anchor regions of interactions and strong bias for convergent CTCF motifs.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Mango is open source and distributed through github at https://github.com/dphansti/mango.CONTACT: mpsnyder@standford.eduSupplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
25970635	0	2015	PLoS One	High resolution mapping of enhancer-promoter interactions.	RNA Polymerase II ChIA-PET data has revealed enhancers that are active in a profiled cell type and the genes that the enhancers regulate through chromatin interactions. The most commonly used computational method for analyzing ChIA-PET data, the ChIA-PET Tool, discovers interaction anchors at a spatial resolution that is insufficient to accurately identify individual enhancers. We introduce Germ, a computational method that estimates the likelihood that any two narrowly defined genomic locations are jointly occupied by RNA Polymerase II. Germ takes a blind deconvolution approach to simultaneously estimate the likelihood of RNA Polymerase II occupation as well as a model of the arrangement of read alignments relative to locations occupied by RNA Polymerase II. Both types of information are utilized to estimate the likelihood that RNA Polymerase II jointly occupies any two genomic locations. We apply Germ to RNA Polymerase II ChIA-PET data from embryonic stem cells to identify the genomic locations that are jointly occupied along with transcription start sites. We show that these genomic locations align more closely with features of active enhancers measured by ChIP-Seq than the locations identified using the ChIA-PET Tool. We also apply Germ to RNA Polymerase II ChIA-PET data from motor neuron progenitors. Based on the Germ results, we observe that a combination of cell type specific and cell type independent regulatory interactions are utilized by cells to regulate gene expression.
25788621	0	2015	Bioinformatics	4DGenome: a comprehensive database of chromatin interactions.	MOTIVATION: The 3D structure of the genome plays a critical role in regulating gene expression. Recent progress in mapping technologies for chromatin interactions has led to a rapid increase in this kind of interaction data. This trend will continue as research in this burgeoning field intensifies.RESULTS: We describe the 4DGenome database that stores chromatin interaction data compiled through comprehensive literature curation. The database currently covers both low- and high-throughput assays, including 3C, 4C-Seq, 5C, Hi-C, ChIA-PET and Capture-C. To complement the set of interactions detected by experimental assays, we also include interactions predicted by a recently developed computational method with demonstrated high accuracy. The database currently contains ∼8 million records, covering 102 cell/tissue types in five organisms. Records in the database are described using a standardized file format, facilitating data exchange. The vast major of the interactions were assigned a confidence score. Using the web interface, users can query and download database records via a number of annotation dimensions. Query results can be visualized along with other genomics datasets via links to the UCSC genome browser. We anticipate that 4DGenome will be a valuable resource for investigating the spatial structure-and-function relationship of genomes.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: 4Dgenome is freely accessible at http://4dgenome.int-med.uiowa.edu. The database and web interface are implemented in MySQL, Apache and JavaScript with all major browsers supported.CONTACT: kai-tan@uiowa.edu Supplementary Information: Supplementary Materials are available at Bioinformatics online.
25303531	13	2014	Cell	Control of cell identity genes occurs in insulated neighborhoods in mammalian chromosomes.	The pluripotent state of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) is produced by active transcription of genes that control cell identity and repression of genes encoding lineage-specifying developmental regulators. Here, we use ESC cohesin ChIA-PET data to identify the local chromosomal structures at both active and repressed genes across the genome. The results produce a map of enhancer-promoter interactions and reveal that super-enhancer-driven genes generally occur within chromosome structures that are formed by the looping of two interacting CTCF sites co-occupied by cohesin. These looped structures form insulated neighborhoods whose integrity is important for proper expression of local genes. We also find that repressed genes encoding lineage-specifying developmental regulators occur within insulated neighborhoods. These results provide insights into the relationship between transcriptional control of cell identity genes and control of local chromosome structure.
24501021	8	2014	Genome Res	Statistical confidence estimation for Hi-C data reveals regulatory chromatin contacts.	Our current understanding of how DNA is packed in the nucleus is most accurate at the fine scale of individual nucleosomes and at the large scale of chromosome territories. However, accurate modeling of DNA architecture at the intermediate scale of ∼50 kb-10 Mb is crucial for identifying functional interactions among regulatory elements and their target promoters. We describe a method, Fit-Hi-C, that assigns statistical confidence estimates to mid-range intra-chromosomal contacts by jointly modeling the random polymer looping effect and previously observed technical biases in Hi-C data sets. We demonstrate that our proposed approach computes accurate empirical null models of contact probability without any distribution assumption, corrects for binning artifacts, and provides improved statistical power relative to a previously described method. High-confidence contacts identified by Fit-Hi-C preferentially link expressed gene promoters to active enhancers identified by chromatin signatures in human embryonic stem cells (ESCs), capture 77% of RNA polymerase II-mediated enhancer-promoter interactions identified using ChIA-PET in mouse ESCs, and confirm previously validated, cell line-specific interactions in mouse cortex cells. We observe that insulators and heterochromatin regions are hubs for high-confidence contacts, while promoters and strong enhancers are involved in fewer contacts. We also observe that binding peaks of master pluripotency factors such as NANOG and POU5F1 are highly enriched in high-confidence contacts for human ESCs. Furthermore, we show that pairs of loci linked by high-confidence contacts exhibit similar replication timing in human and mouse ESCs and preferentially lie within the boundaries of topological domains for human and mouse cell lines.
25228660	4	2014	Genome Res	Genome-wide map of regulatory interactions in the human genome.	Increasing evidence suggests that interactions between regulatory genomic elements play an important role in regulating gene expression. We generated a genome-wide interaction map of regulatory elements in human cells (ENCODE tier 1 cells, K562, GM12878) using Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired-End Tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) experiments targeting six broadly distributed factors. Bound regions covered 80% of DNase I hypersensitive sites including 99.7% of TSS and 98% of enhancers. Correlating this map with ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data sets revealed cohesin, CTCF, and ZNF143 as key components of three-dimensional chromatin structure and revealed how the distal chromatin state affects gene transcription. Comparison of interactions between cell types revealed that enhancer-promoter interactions were highly cell-type-specific. Construction and comparison of distal and proximal regulatory networks revealed stark differences in structure and biological function. Proximal binding events are enriched at genes with housekeeping functions, while distal binding events interact with genes involved in dynamic biological processes including response to stimulus. This study reveals new mechanistic and functional insights into regulatory region organization in the nucleus.
24763502	2	2014	PLoS One	Characterization of genomic vitamin D receptor binding sites through chromatin looping and opening.	The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is a transcription factor that mediates the genomic effects of 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3). Genome-wide there are several thousand binding sites and hundreds of primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target genes, but their functional relation is largely elusive. In this study, we used ChIA-PET data of the transcription factor CTCF in combination with VDR ChIP-seq data, in order to map chromatin domains containing VDR binding sites. In total, we found 1,599 such VDR containing chromatin domains and studied in THP-1 human monocytic leukemia cells four representatives of them. Our combined ChIP-seq and FAIRE-seq time course data showed that each of these four domains contained a master VDR binding site, where an increase of VDR binding pairs with 1,25(OH)2D3-promoted chromatin opening and the presence of a highly significant DR3-type sequence below the peak summit. These sites differed in their relative VDR binding but not in their kinetics, while other loci either had a weaker and delayed VDR association or could not be confirmed at all. All studied chromatin domains contained at least one primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target gene demonstrating a characteristic slope of mRNA increase, while neighboring genes responded delayed, if at all. In conclusion, the observation of ligand-inducible VDR binding and chromatin opening combined with a DR3-type sequence highlighted genome-wide 160 VDR loci that have within their chromatin domain a more than 4-fold increased likelihood to identify a primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target gene than in the vicinity of other genomic VDR binding sites.
25114054	1	2014	Nucleic Acids Res	A statistical model of ChIA-PET data for accurate detection of chromatin 3D interactions.	Identification of three-dimensional (3D) interactions between regulatory elements across the genome is crucial to unravel the complex regulatory machinery that orchestrates proliferation and differentiation of cells. ChIA-PET is a novel method to identify such interactions, where physical contacts between regions bound by a specific protein are quantified using next-generation sequencing. However, determining the significance of the observed interaction frequencies in such datasets is challenging, and few methods have been proposed. Despite the fact that regions that are close in linear genomic distance have a much higher tendency to interact by chance, no methods to date are capable of taking such dependency into account. Here, we propose a statistical model taking into account the genomic distance relationship, as well as the general propensity of anchors to be involved in contacts overall. Using both real and simulated data, we show that the previously proposed statistical test, based on Fisher's exact test, leads to invalid results when data are dependent on genomic distance. We also evaluate our method on previously validated cell-line specific and constitutive 3D interactions, and show that relevant interactions are significant, while avoiding over-estimating the significance of short nearby interactions.
24782518	1	2014	Nucleic Acids Res	Nucleosome eviction and multiple co-factor binding predict estrogen-receptor-alpha-associated long-range interactions.	Many enhancers regulate their target genes via long-distance interactions. High-throughput experiments like ChIA-PET have been developed to map such largely cell-type-specific interactions between cis-regulatory elements genome-widely. In this study, we integrated multiple types of data in order to reveal the general hidden patterns embedded in the ChIA-PET data. We found characteristic distance features related to promoter-promoter, enhancer-enhancer and insulator-insulator interactions. Although a protein may have many binding sites along the genome, our hypothesis is that those sites that share certain open chromatin structure can accommodate relatively larger protein complex consisting of specific regulatory and 'bridging' factors, and may be more likely to form robust long-range deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) loops. This hypothesis was validated in the estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) ChIA-PET data. An efficient classifier was built to predict ERα-associated long-range interactions solely from the related ChIP-seq data, hence linking distal ERα-dependent enhancers to their target genes. We further applied the classifier to generate additional novel interactions, which were undetected in the original ChIA-PET paper but were validated by other independent experiments. Our work provides a new insight into the long-range chromatin interactions through deeper and integrative ChIA-PET data analysis and demonstrates DNA looping predictability from ordinary ChIP-seq data.
25485614	0	2014	Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol	A Bayesian mixture model for chromatin interaction data.	Chromatin interactions mediated by a particular protein are of interest for studying gene regulation, especially the regulation of genes that are associated with, or known to be causative of, a disease. A recent molecular technique, Chromatin interaction analysis by paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET), that uses chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and high throughput paired-end sequencing, is able to detect such chromatin interactions genomewide. However, ChIA-PET may generate noise (i.e., pairings of DNA fragments by random chance) in addition to true signal (i.e., pairings of DNA fragments by interactions). In this paper, we propose MC_DIST based on a mixture modeling framework to identify true chromatin interactions from ChIA-PET count data (counts of DNA fragment pairs). The model is cast into a Bayesian framework to take into account the dependency among the data and the available information on protein binding sites and gene promoters to reduce false positives. A simulation study showed that MC_DIST outperforms the previously proposed hypergeometric model in terms of both power and type I error rate. A real data study showed that MC_DIST may identify potential chromatin interactions between protein binding sites and gene promoters that may be missed by the hypergeometric model. An R package implementing the MC_DIST model is available at http://www.stat.osu.edu/~statgen/SOFTWARE/MDM.
25280477	0	2014	J Mol Cell Biol	Hot spots of DNA double-strand breaks and genomic contacts of human rDNA units are involved in epigenetic regulation.	DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are involved in many cellular mechanisms, including replication, transcription, and genome rearrangements. The recent observation that hot spots of DSBs in human chromosomes delimit DNA domains that possess coordinately expressed genes suggests a strong relationship between the organization of transcription patterns and hot spots of DSBs. In this study, we performed mapping of hot spots of DSBs in a human 43-kb ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeated unit. We observed that rDNA units corresponded to the most fragile sites in human chromosomes and that these units possessed at least nine specific regions containing clusters of extremely frequently occurring DSBs, which were located exclusively in non-coding intergenic spacer (IGS) regions. The hot spots of DSBs corresponded to only a specific subset of DNase-hypersensitive sites, and coincided with CTCF, PARP1, and HNRNPA2B1 binding sites, and H3K4me3 marks. Our rDNA-4C data indicate that the regions of IGS containing the hot spots of DSBs often form contacts with specific regions in different chromosomes, including the pericentromeric regions, as well as regions that are characterized by H3K27ac and H3K4me3 marks, CTCF binding sites, ChIA-PET and RIP signals, and high levels of DSBs. The data suggest a strong link between chromosome breakage and several different mechanisms of epigenetic regulation of gene expression.
24835279	0	2014	PLoS One	Statistical models for detecting differential chromatin interactions mediated by a protein.	Chromatin interactions mediated by a protein of interest are of great scientific interest. Recent studies show that protein-mediated chromatin interactions can have different intensities in different types of cells or in different developmental stages of a cell. Such differences can be associated with a disease or with the development of a cell. Thus, it is of great importance to detect protein-mediated chromatin interactions with different intensities in different cells. A recent molecular technique, Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired-End Tag Sequencing (ChIA-PET), which uses formaldehyde cross-linking and paired-end sequencing, is able to detect genome-wide chromatin interactions mediated by a protein of interest. Here we proposed two models (One-Step Model and Two-Step Model) for two sample ChIA-PET count data (one biological replicate in each sample) to identify differential chromatin interactions mediated by a protein of interest. Both models incorporate the data dependency and the extent to which a fragment pair is related to a pair of DNA loci of interest to make accurate identifications. The One-Step Model makes use of the data more efficiently but is more computationally intensive. An extensive simulation study showed that the models can detect those differentially interacted chromatins and there is a good agreement between each classification result and the truth. Application of the method to a two-sample ChIA-PET data set illustrates its utility. The two models are implemented as an R package MDM (available at http://www.stat.osu.edu/~statgen/SOFTWARE/MDM).
24797675	0	2014	PLoS One	Direct evidence for pitavastatin induced chromatin structure change in the KLF4 gene in endothelial cells.	Statins exert atheroprotective effects through the induction of specific transcriptional factors in multiple organs. In endothelial cells, statin-dependent atheroprotective gene up-regulation is mediated by Kruppel-like factor (KLF) family transcription factors. To dissect the mechanism of gene regulation, we sought to determine molecular targets by performing microarray analyses of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) treated with pitavastatin, and KLF4 was determined to be the most highly induced gene. In addition, it was revealed that the atheroprotective genes induced with pitavastatin, such as nitric oxide synthase 3 (NOS3) and thrombomodulin (THBD), were suppressed by KLF4 knockdown. Myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family activation is reported to be involved in pitavastatin-dependent KLF4 induction. We focused on MEF2C among the MEF2 family members and identified a novel functional MEF2C binding site 148 kb upstream of the KLF4 gene by chromatin immunoprecipitation along with deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) followed by luciferase assay. By applying whole genome and quantitative chromatin conformation analysis {chromatin interaction analysis with paired end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET), and real time chromosome conformation capture (3C) assay}, we observed that the MEF2C-bound enhancer and transcription start site (TSS) of KLF4 came into closer spatial proximity by pitavastatin treatment. 3D-Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) imaging supported the conformational change in individual cells. Taken together, dynamic chromatin conformation change was shown to mediate pitavastatin-responsive gene induction in endothelial cells.
24511080	0	2014	Bioinformatics	HiBrowse: multi-purpose statistical analysis of genome-wide chromatin 3D organization.	Recently developed methods that couple next-generation sequencing with chromosome conformation capture-based techniques, such as Hi-C and ChIA-PET, allow for characterization of genome-wide chromatin 3D structure. Understanding the organization of chromatin in three dimensions is a crucial next step in the unraveling of global gene regulation, and methods for analyzing such data are needed. We have developed HiBrowse, a user-friendly web-tool consisting of a range of hypothesis-based and descriptive statistics, using realistic assumptions in null-models.</AbstractText>: Recently developed methods that couple next-generation sequencing with chromosome conformation capture-based techniques, such as Hi-C and ChIA-PET, allow for characterization of genome-wide chromatin 3D structure. Understanding the organization of chromatin in three dimensions is a crucial next step in the unraveling of global gene regulation, and methods for analyzing such data are needed. We have developed HiBrowse, a user-friendly web-tool consisting of a range of hypothesis-based and descriptive statistics, using realistic assumptions in null-models.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: HiBrowse is supported by all major browsers, and is freely available at http://hyperbrowser.uio.no/3d. Software is implemented in Python, and source code is available for download by following instructions on the main site.
24360274	38	2013	Cell	Interactome maps of mouse gene regulatory domains reveal basic principles of transcriptional regulation.	A key finding of the ENCODE project is that the enhancer landscape of mammalian cells undergoes marked alterations during ontogeny. However, the nature and extent of these changes are unclear. As part of the NIH Mouse Regulome Project, we here combined DNaseI hypersensitivity, ChIP-seq, and ChIA-PET technologies to map the promoter-enhancer interactomes of pluripotent ES cells and differentiated B lymphocytes. We confirm that enhancer usage varies widely across tissues. Unexpectedly, we find that this feature extends to broadly transcribed genes, including Myc and Pim1 cell-cycle regulators, which associate with an entirely different set of enhancers in ES and B cells. By means of high-resolution CpG methylomes, genome editing, and digital footprinting, we show that these enhancers recruit lineage-determining factors. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the turning on and off of enhancers during development correlates with promoter activity. We propose that organisms rely on a dynamic enhancer landscape to control basic cellular functions in a tissue-specific manner.
23704192	21	2013	Genome Res	The genomic landscape of cohesin-associated chromatin interactions.	Cohesin is implicated in establishing tissue-specific DNA loops that target enhancers to promoters, and also localizes to sites bound by the insulator protein CTCF, which blocks enhancer-promoter communication. However, cohesin-associated interactions have not been characterized on a genome-wide scale. Here we performed chromatin interaction analysis with paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) of the cohesin subunit SMC1A in developing mouse limb. We identified 2264 SMC1A interactions, of which 1491 (65%) involved sites co-occupied by CTCF. SMC1A participates in tissue-specific enhancer-promoter interactions and interactions that demarcate regions of correlated regulatory output. In contrast to previous studies, we also identified interactions between promoters and distal sites that are maintained in multiple tissues but are poised in embryonic stem cells and resolve to tissue-specific activated or repressed chromatin states in the mouse embryo. Our results reveal the diversity of cohesin-associated interactions in the genome and highlight their role in establishing the regulatory architecture of development.
23411633	17	2013	Nat Protoc	Multiplexed chromosome conformation capture sequencing for rapid genome-scale high-resolution detection of long-range chromatin interactions.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology is a powerful and increasingly popular tool for analyzing the spatial organization of genomes. Several 3C variants have been developed (e.g., 4C, 5C, ChIA-PET, Hi-C), allowing large-scale mapping of long-range genomic interactions. Here we describe multiplexed 3C sequencing (3C-seq), a 4C variant coupled to next-generation sequencing, allowing genome-scale detection of long-range interactions with candidate regions. Compared with several other available techniques, 3C-seq offers a superior resolution (typically single restriction fragment resolution; approximately 1-8 kb on average) and can be applied in a semi-high-throughput fashion. It allows the assessment of long-range interactions of up to 192 genes or regions of interest in parallel by multiplexing library sequencing. This renders multiplexed 3C-seq an inexpensive, quick (total hands-on time of 2 weeks) and efficient method that is ideal for the in-depth analysis of complex genetic loci. The preparation of multiplexed 3C-seq libraries can be performed by any investigator with basic skills in molecular biology techniques. Data analysis requires basic expertise in bioinformatics and in Linux and Python environments. The protocol describes all materials, critical steps and bioinformatics tools required for successful application of 3C-seq technology.
23945083	10	2013	BMC Genomics	Characterization of constitutive CTCF/cohesin loci: a possible role in establishing topological domains in mammalian genomes.	BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggested that human/mammalian genomes are divided into large, discrete domains that are units of chromosome organization. CTCF, a CCCTC binding factor, has a diverse role in genome regulation including transcriptional regulation, chromosome-boundary insulation, DNA replication, and chromatin packaging. It remains unclear whether a subset of CTCF binding sites plays a functional role in establishing/maintaining chromatin topological domains.RESULTS: We systematically analysed the genomic, transcriptomic and epigenetic profiles of the CTCF binding sites in 56 human cell lines from ENCODE. We identified ~24,000 CTCF sites (referred to as constitutive sites) that were bound in more than 90% of the cell lines. Our analysis revealed: 1) constitutive CTCF loci were located in constitutive open chromatin and often co-localized with constitutive cohesin loci; 2) most constitutive CTCF loci were distant from transcription start sites and lacked CpG islands but were enriched with the full-spectrum CTCF motifs: a recently reported 33/34-mer and two other potentially novel (22/26-mer); 3) more importantly, most constitutive CTCF loci were present in CTCF-mediated chromatin interactions detected by ChIA-PET and these pair-wise interactions occurred predominantly within, but not between, topological domains identified by Hi-C.CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the constitutive CTCF sites may play a role in organizing/maintaining the recently identified topological domains that are common across most human cells.
23571755	9	2013	Nucleic Acids Res	Handling realistic assumptions in hypothesis testing of 3D co-localization of genomic elements.	The study of chromatin 3D structure has recently gained much focus owing to novel techniques for detecting genome-wide chromatin contacts using next-generation sequencing. A deeper understanding of the architecture of the DNA inside the nucleus is crucial for gaining insight into fundamental processes such as transcriptional regulation, genome dynamics and genome stability. Chromatin conformation capture-based methods, such as Hi-C and ChIA-PET, are now paving the way for routine genome-wide studies of chromatin 3D structure in a range of organisms and tissues. However, appropriate methods for analyzing such data are lacking. Here, we propose a hypothesis test and an enrichment score of 3D co-localization of genomic elements that handles intra- or interchromosomal interactions, both separately and jointly, and that adjusts for biases caused by structural dependencies in the 3D data. We show that maintaining structural properties during resampling is essential to obtain valid estimation of P-values. We apply the method on chromatin states and a set of mutated regions in leukemia cells, and find significant co-localization of these elements, with varying enrichment scores, supporting the role of chromatin 3D structure in shaping the landscape of somatic mutations in cancer.
24357409	5	2013	Nucleic Acids Res	Dissecting the chromatin interactome of microRNA genes.	Our knowledge of the role of higher-order chromatin structures in transcription of microRNA genes (MIRs) is evolving rapidly. Here we investigate the effect of 3D architecture of chromatin on the transcriptional regulation of MIRs. We demonstrate that MIRs have transcriptional features that are similar to protein-coding genes. RNA polymerase II-associated ChIA-PET data reveal that many groups of MIRs and protein-coding genes are organized into functionally compartmentalized chromatin communities and undergo coordinated expression when their genomic loci are spatially colocated. We observe that MIRs display widespread communication in those transcriptionally active communities. Moreover, miRNA-target interactions are significantly enriched among communities with functional homogeneity while depleted from the same community from which they originated, suggesting MIRs coordinating function-related pathways at posttranscriptional level. Further investigation demonstrates the existence of spatial MIR-MIR chromatin interacting networks. We show that groups of spatially coordinated MIRs are frequently from the same family and involved in the same disease category. The spatial interaction network possesses both common and cell-specific subnetwork modules that result from the spatial organization of chromatin within different cell types. Together, our study unveils an entirely unexplored layer of MIR regulation throughout the human genome that links the spatial coordination of MIRs to their co-expression and function.
24071518	3	2013	Mol Cell Endocrinol	Estrogen receptor-mediated long-range chromatin interactions and transcription in breast cancer.	Estrogen induces the binding of ERα to thousands of locations in the breast cancer genome, preferring intergenic and distal regions rather than near the promoters of estrogen-regulated genes. With recent technological innovations in mapping and characterization of global chromatin organization, evidence now indicates ERα mediates long-range chromatin interactions to control gene transcription. The principles that govern how ERα communicates with their putative target genes via chromosomal interactions are also beginning to unravel. Herein, we summarize our current knowledge on the functional significance of chromatin looping in estrogen-mediated transcription. ERα collaborative factors and other players that contribute to define the genomic interactions in breast cancer cells will also be discussed. Defects in chromatin organization are emerging key players in diseases such as cancer, thus understanding how ERα-mediated chromatin looping affects genome organization will clarify the receptor's role in estrogen responsive pathways sensitive to defects in chromatin organization.
24051548	3	2013	Nucleus	The statistical-mechanics of chromosome conformation capture.	Since Jacob and Monod's characterization of the role of DNA elements in gene control, it has been recognized that the linear organization of genome structure is important for the regulation of gene transcription and hence the manifestation of phenotypes. Similarly, it has long been hypothesized that the spatial organization (in three dimensions evolving through time), as part of the epigenome, makes a significant contribution to the genotype-phenotype transition. Proximity ligation assays commonly known as chromosome conformation capture (3C) and 3C based methodologies (e.g., GCC, HiC and ChIA-Pet) are increasingly being incorporated into empirical studies to investigate the role that three-dimensional genome structure plays in the regulation of phenotype. The apparent simplicity of these methodologies-crosslink chromatin, digest, dilute, ligate, detect interactions-belies the complexity of the data and the considerations that should be taken into account to ensure the generation and accurate interpretation of reliable data. Here we discuss the probabilistic nature of these methodologies and how this contributes to their endogenous limitations.
24014450	3	2013	Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol	Chromatin looping and organization at developmentally regulated gene loci.	Developmentally regulated genes are often controlled by distant enhancers, silencers and insulators, to implement their correct transcriptional programs. In recent years, the development of 3C and derived techniques (4C, 5C, HiC, ChIA-PET, etc.) has confirmed that chromatin looping is an important mechanism for the transfer of regulatory information in mammalian cells. At many developmentally regulated gene loci, transcriptional activation is indeed accompanied by the formation of chromatin loops between genes and distant enhancers. Similarly, dynamic looping between insulator elements and changes in local 3D organization may be observed upon variation in transcriptional activity. Chromatin looping also occurs at silent gene loci, where its function remains less understood. In lineage-committed cells, partial 3D configurations are detected at loci that are activated at later stages. However, these partial configurations usually lack promoter-enhancer loops that accompany transcriptional activation, suggesting they have structural functions. Definitive evidence for a repressive role of chromatin looping is still lacking. Chromatin loops have been reported at repressed loci but, alternatively, they may act as a distraction for active loops. Together, these mechanisms allow fine-tuning of regulatory programs, thus providing further diversity in the transcriptional control of developmentally regulated gene loci.
24262216	2	2013	Bioinformatics	Identification of transcription factors for drug-associated gene modules and biomedical implications.	MOTIVATION: One of the major findings in systems biomedicine is that both pathogenesis of diseases and drug mode of action have a module basis. However, the transcription factors (TFs) regulating the modules remain largely unknown.RESULTS: In this study, by using biclustering approach FABIA (factor analysis for bicluster acquisition), we generate 49 modules for gene expression profiles on 1309 agent treatments. These modules are of biological relevance in terms of functional enrichment, drug-drug interactions and 3D proximity in chromatins. By using the information of drug targets (some of which are TFs) and biological regulation, the links between 28 modules and 12 specific TFs, such as estrogen receptors (ERs), nuclear factor-like 2 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, can be established. Some of the links are supported by 3D transcriptional regulation data [derived from ChIA-PET (chromatin interaction analysis using paired-end tags) experiments] and drug mode of action as well. The relationships between modules and TFs provide new clues to interpreting biological regulation mechanisms, in particular, the lipid metabolism regulation by ERα. In addition, the links between natural products (e.g. polyphenols) and their associated modules and TFs are helpful to elucidate their polypharmacological effects in terms of activating specific TFs, such as ERs, nuclear factor-like 2 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma.
24246225	2	2013	Semin Immunol	Early T helper cell programming of gene expression in human.	Molecular mechanisms guiding naïve T helper cell differentiation into functionally specified effector cells are intensively studied. The rapidly growing knowledge is mainly achieved by using mouse cells or disease models. Comparatively exiguous data is gathered from human primary cells although they provide the &quot;ultimate model&quot; for immunology in man, have been exploited in many original studies paving the way for the field, and can be analyzed more easily than ever with the help of modern technology and methods. As usage of mouse models is unavoidable in translational research, parallel human and mouse studies should be performed to assure the relevancy of the hypothesis created during the basic research. In this review, we give an overview on the status of the studies conducted with human primary cells aiming at elucidating the mechanisms instructing the priming of T helper cell subtypes. The special emphasis is given to the recent high-throughput studies. In addition, by comparing the human and mouse studies we intend to point out the regulatory mechanisms and questions which are lacking examination with human primary cells.
22265404	186	2012	Cell	Extensive promoter-centered chromatin interactions provide a topological basis for transcription regulation.	Higher-order chromosomal organization for transcription regulation is poorly understood in eukaryotes. Using genome-wide Chromatin Interaction Analysis with Paired-End-Tag sequencing (ChIA-PET), we mapped long-range chromatin interactions associated with RNA polymerase II in human cells and uncovered widespread promoter-centered intragenic, extragenic, and intergenic interactions. These interactions further aggregated into higher-order clusters, wherein proximal and distal genes were engaged through promoter-promoter interactions. Most genes with promoter-promoter interactions were active and transcribed cooperatively, and some interacting promoters could influence each other implying combinatorial complexity of transcriptional controls. Comparative analyses of different cell lines showed that cell-specific chromatin interactions could provide structural frameworks for cell-specific transcription, and suggested significant enrichment of enhancer-promoter interactions for cell-specific functions. Furthermore, genetically-identified disease-associated noncoding elements were found to be spatially engaged with corresponding genes through long-range interactions. Overall, our study provides insights into transcription regulation by three-dimensional chromatin interactions for both housekeeping and cell-specific genes in human cells.
22215806	106	2012	Genes Dev	A decade of 3C technologies: insights into nuclear organization.	Over the past 10 years, the development of chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology and the subsequent genomic variants thereof have enabled the analysis of nuclear organization at an unprecedented resolution and throughput. The technology relies on the original and, in hindsight, remarkably simple idea that digestion and religation of fixed chromatin in cells, followed by the quantification of ligation junctions, allows for the determination of DNA contact frequencies and insight into chromosome topology. Here we evaluate and compare the current 3C-based methods (including 4C [chromosome conformation capture-on-chip], 5C [chromosome conformation capture carbon copy], HiC, and ChIA-PET), summarize their contribution to our current understanding of genome structure, and discuss how shape influences genome function.
22926262	15	2012	Methods	ChIA-PET analysis of transcriptional chromatin interactions.	Long-range chromatin contacts between specific DNA regulatory elements play a pivotal role in gene expression regulation, and a global characterization of these interactions in the 3-dimensional (3D) chromatin structure is imperative in understanding signaling networks and cell states. Chromatin Interaction Analysis using Paired-End Tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) is a method which converts functional chromatin structure into millions of short tag sequences. Combining Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP), proximity ligation and high-throughput sequencing, ChIA-PET provides a global and unbiased interrogation of higher-order chromatin structures associated with specific protein factors. Here, we describe the detailed procedures of the ChIA-PET methodology, unraveling transcription-associated chromatin contacts in a model human cell line.
22630332	5	2012	Genome Med	Pharmacogene regulatory elements: from discovery to applications.	Regulatory elements play an important role in the variability of individual responses to drug treatment. This has been established through studies on three classes of elements that regulate RNA and protein abundance: promoters, enhancers and microRNAs. Each of these elements, and genetic variants within them, are being characterized at an exponential pace by next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies. In this review, we outline examples of how each class of element affects drug response via regulation of drug targets, transporters and enzymes. We also discuss the impact of NGS technologies such as chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), and the ramifications of new techniques such as high-throughput chromosome capture (Hi-C), chromatin interaction analysis by paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) and massively parallel reporter assays (MPRA). NGS approaches are generating data faster than they can be analyzed, and new methods will be required to prioritize laboratory results before they are ready for the clinic. However, there is no doubt that these approaches will bring about a systems-level understanding of the interplay between genetic variants and drug response. An understanding of the importance of regulatory variants in pharmacogenomics will facilitate the identification of responders versus non-responders, the prevention of adverse effects and the optimization of therapies for individual patients.
22564980	4	2012	J Vis Exp	Chromatin Interaction Analysis with Paired-End Tag Sequencing (ChIA-PET) for mapping chromatin interactions and understanding transcription regulation.	Genomes are organized into three-dimensional structures, adopting higher-order conformations inside the micron-sized nuclear spaces (7, 2, 12). Such architectures are not random and involve interactions between gene promoters and regulatory elements (13). The binding of transcription factors to specific regulatory sequences brings about a network of transcription regulation and coordination (1, 14). Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired-End Tag Sequencing (ChIA-PET) was developed to identify these higher-order chromatin structures (5,6). Cells are fixed and interacting loci are captured by covalent DNA-protein cross-links. To minimize non-specific noise and reduce complexity, as well as to increase the specificity of the chromatin interaction analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) is used against specific protein factors to enrich chromatin fragments of interest before proximity ligation. Ligation involving half-linkers subsequently forms covalent links between pairs of DNA fragments tethered together within individual chromatin complexes. The flanking MmeI restriction enzyme sites in the half-linkers allow extraction of paired end tag-linker-tag constructs (PETs) upon MmeI digestion. As the half-linkers are biotinylated, these PET constructs are purified using streptavidin-magnetic beads. The purified PETs are ligated with next-generation sequencing adaptors and a catalog of interacting fragments is generated via next-generation sequencers such as the Illumina Genome Analyzer. Mapping and bioinformatics analysis is then performed to identify ChIP-enriched binding sites and ChIP-enriched chromatin interactions (8). We have produced a video to demonstrate critical aspects of the ChIA-PET protocol, especially the preparation of ChIP as the quality of ChIP plays a major role in the outcome of a ChIA-PET library. As the protocols are very long, only the critical steps are shown in the video.
21685913	170	2011	Nat Genet	CTCF-mediated functional chromatin interactome in pluripotent cells.	Mammalian genomes are viewed as functional organizations that orchestrate spatial and temporal gene regulation. CTCF, the most characterized insulator-binding protein, has been implicated as a key genome organizer. However, little is known about CTCF-associated higher-order chromatin structures at a global scale. Here we applied chromatin interaction analysis by paired-end tag (ChIA-PET) sequencing to elucidate the CTCF-chromatin interactome in pluripotent cells. From this analysis, we identified 1,480 cis- and 336 trans-interacting loci with high reproducibility and precision. Associating these chromatin interaction loci with their underlying epigenetic states, promoter activities, enhancer binding and nuclear lamina occupancy, we uncovered five distinct chromatin domains that suggest potential new models of CTCF function in chromatin organization and transcriptional control. Specifically, CTCF interactions demarcate chromatin-nuclear membrane attachments and influence proper gene expression through extensive cross-talk between promoters and regulatory elements. This highly complex nuclear organization offers insights toward the unifying principles that govern genome plasticity and function.
21318127	12	2011	Epigenomics	Histone modifications and chromatin organization in prostate cancer.	Epigenetic mechanisms, including histone modifications, nucleosomal remodeling and chromosomal looping, contribute to the onset and progression of prostate cancer. Recent technical advances significantly increase our understanding of the genome-wide epigenetic regulation of gene expression in prostate cancer. Aberrant genomic distribution and global level of histone modifications, nucleosome repositioning at the gene promoter and enhancer regions, as well as androgen receptor-mediated chromosomal looping may lead to the silencing of tumor suppressor genes and the activation of proto-oncogenes. In addition, androgen receptor-induced chromosomal looping facilitates recurrent gene fusion in prostate cancer. Studies in epigenetic regulation have translational implications in the identification of new biomarkers and the development of new therapies in prostate cancer.
22120510	9	2011	Semin Cell Dev Biol	Unravelling global genome organization by 3C-seq.	Eukaryotic genomes exist in the cell nucleus as an elaborate three-dimensional structure which reflects various nuclear processes such as transcription, DNA replication and repair. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) combined with chromosome conformation capture (3C), referred to as 3C-seq in this article, has recently been applied to the yeast and human genomes, revealing genome-wide views of functional associations among genes and their regulatory elements. Here, we compare the latest genomic approaches such as 3C-seq and ChIA-PET, and provide a condensed overview of how eukaryotic genomes are functionally organized in the nucleus.
20181287	49	2010	Genome Biol	ChIA-PET tool for comprehensive chromatin interaction analysis with paired-end tag sequencing.	Chromatin interaction analysis with paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) is a new technology to study genome-wide long-range chromatin interactions bound by protein factors. Here we present ChIA-PET Tool, a software package for automatic processing of ChIA-PET sequence data, including linker filtering, mapping tags to reference genomes, identifying protein binding sites and chromatin interactions, and displaying the results on a graphical genome browser. ChIA-PET Tool is fast, accurate, comprehensive, user-friendly, and open source (available at http://chiapet.gis.a-star.edu.sg).
20069536	9	2010	Curr Protoc Mol Biol	Chromatin interaction analysis using paired-end tag sequencing.	Chromatin Interaction Analysis using Paired-End Tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) is a technique developed for large-scale, de novo analysis of higher-order chromatin structures. Cells are treated with formaldehyde to cross-link chromatin interactions, DNA segments bound by protein factors are enriched by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and interacting DNA fragments are then captured by proximity ligation. The Paired-End Tag (PET) strategy is applied to the construction of ChIA-PET libraries, which are sequenced by high-throughput next-generation sequencing technologies. Finally, raw PET sequences are subjected to bioinformatics analysis, resulting in a genome-wide map of binding sites and chromatin interactions mediated by the protein factor under study. This unit describes ChIA-PET for genome-wide analysis of chromatin interactions in mammalian cells, with the application of Roche/454 and Illumina sequencing technologies.
20156333	3	2010	Breast Cancer Res	Estrogen receptor action in three dimensions - looping the loop.	Due to advances in genomic technologies, our understanding of estrogen receptor (ER)-mediated transcription in breast cancer cells has evolved significantly in recent years. Genome-wide mapping experiments revealed thousands of ER-binding events, but linking them to the target genes has been an ongoing struggle. A recent paper describes a new technique, called ChIA-PET (chromatin interaction analysis using paired-end tag sequencing), that can directly address these questions. ChIA-PET is an unbiased approach for simultaneously identifying all genome-wide binding events of a transcription factor and those involved in long-range chromatin loops.
19890323	302	2009	Nature	An oestrogen-receptor-alpha-bound human chromatin interactome.	Genomes are organized into high-level three-dimensional structures, and DNA elements separated by long genomic distances can in principle interact functionally. Many transcription factors bind to regulatory DNA elements distant from gene promoters. Although distal binding sites have been shown to regulate transcription by long-range chromatin interactions at a few loci, chromatin interactions and their impact on transcription regulation have not been investigated in a genome-wide manner. Here we describe the development of a new strategy, chromatin interaction analysis by paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) for the de novo detection of global chromatin interactions, with which we have comprehensively mapped the chromatin interaction network bound by oestrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha) in the human genome. We found that most high-confidence remote ER-alpha-binding sites are anchored at gene promoters through long-range chromatin interactions, suggesting that ER-alpha functions by extensive chromatin looping to bring genes together for coordinated transcriptional regulation. We propose that chromatin interactions constitute a primary mechanism for regulating transcription in mammalian genomes.
