PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
24025032	4	2013	Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol	Quantifying transcription factor kinetics: at work or at play?	Transcription factors (TFs) interact dynamically in vivo with chromatin binding sites. Here we summarize and compare the four different techniques that are currently used to measure these kinetics in live cells, namely fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP), fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS), single molecule tracking (SMT) and competition ChIP (CC). We highlight the principles underlying each of these approaches as well as their advantages and disadvantages. A comparison of data from each of these techniques raises an important question: do measured transcription kinetics reflect biologically functional interactions at specific sites (i.e. working TFs) or do they reflect non-specific interactions (i.e. playing TFs)? To help resolve this dilemma we discuss five key unresolved biological questions related to the functionality of transient and prolonged binding events at both specific promoter response elements as well as non-specific sites. In support of functionality, we review data suggesting that TF residence times are tightly regulated, and that this regulation modulates transcriptional output at single genes. We argue that in addition to this site-specific regulatory role, TF residence times also determine the fraction of promoter targets occupied within a cell thereby impacting the functional status of cellular gene networks. Thus, TF residence times are key parameters that could influence transcription in multiple ways.
23764940	1	2013	Nat Protoc	Genome-wide measurement of protein-DNA binding dynamics using competition ChIP.	Competition chromatin immunoprecipitation (competition ChIP) enables experimenters to measure protein-DNA dynamics at a single locus or across the entire genome, depending on the detection method. Competition ChIP relies on a cell containing two copies of a single DNA-associated factor, with each copy of the factor differentially epitope tagged. One of the copies is expressed constitutively and the second is induced as a competitor. The ratio of isoforms associated with discrete genomic locations is detected by ChIP-on-chip (ChIP-chip) or ChIP-sequencing (ChIP-seq). The rate at which the resident isoform of the protein is replaced by the competitor at each binding location enables the calculation of residence time for that factor at each site of interaction genome wide. Here we provide a detailed protocol for designing and performing competition ChIP experiments in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which takes ∼5 d to complete (not including strain production and characterizations, which may take as long as 6 months). Included in this protocol are guidelines for downstream bioinformatic analysis to extract residence times throughout the genome.
22498630	51	2012	Nature	Genome-wide protein-DNA binding dynamics suggest a molecular clutch for transcription factor function.	Dynamic access to genetic information is central to organismal development and environmental response. Consequently, genomic processes must be regulated by mechanisms that alter genome function relatively rapidly. Conventional chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments measure transcription factor occupancy, but give no indication of kinetics and are poor predictors of transcription factor function at a given locus. To measure transcription-factor-binding dynamics across the genome, we performed competition ChIP (refs 6, 7) with a sequence-specific Saccharomyces cerevisiae transcription factor, Rap1 (ref. 8). Rap1-binding dynamics and Rap1 occupancy were only weakly correlated (R(2) = 0.14), but binding dynamics were more strongly linked to function than occupancy. Long Rap1 residence was coupled to transcriptional activation, whereas fast binding turnover, which we refer to as 'treadmilling', was linked to low transcriptional output. Thus, DNA-binding events that seem identical by conventional ChIP may have different underlying modes of interaction that lead to opposing functional outcomes. We propose that transcription factor binding turnover is a major point of regulation in determining the functional consequences of transcription factor binding, and is mediated mainly by control of competition between transcription factors and nucleosomes. Our model predicts a clutch-like mechanism that rapidly engages a treadmilling transcription factor into a stable binding state, or vice versa, to modulate transcription factor function.
17916562	8	2007	J Biol Chem	Dynamics of the hypoxia-inducible factor-1-vascular endothelial growth factor promoter complex.	Some transactivator-promoter complexes are highly dynamic due to active disruption of the complex by proteolytic or nonproteolytic mechanisms, and this appears to be an important mechanism by which their activity is governed tightly and eventually terminated. However, the generality of these mechanisms is unclear. In this report, we address the dynamics of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) binding to the vascular endothelial growth factor promoter. HIF-1 is a heterodimeric transcription factor whose activity is triggered by an increase in HIF-1alpha levels in hypoxic cells. A &quot;competition ChIP&quot; assay is employed to demonstrate that HIF-1alpha forms a kinetically stable complex with the native vascular endothelial growth factor promoter that has a half-life in excess of 1 h. Thus, HIF-1 activity does not require rapid proteolytic turnover of the promoter-bound transactivator, nor is the activator-promoter complex constantly disassembled by chaperones. However, we do find that after cessation of the inducing signal, HIF-1 activity is slowly returned to basal levels by proteasome-mediated proteolysis of the promoter-bound HIF-1alpha protein.
