PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
26184873	0	2015	Nucleic Acids Res	Detection of differentially methylated regions from whole-genome bisulfite sequencing data without replicates.	DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification involved in many biological processes and diseases. Recent developments in whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) technology have enabled genome-wide measurements of DNA methylation at single base pair resolution. Many experiments have been conducted to compare DNA methylation profiles under different biological contexts, with the goal of identifying differentially methylated regions (DMRs). Due to the high cost of WGBS experiments, many studies are still conducted without biological replicates. Methods and tools available for analyzing such data are very limited.We develop a statistical method, DSS-single, for detecting DMRs from WGBS data without replicates. We characterize the count data using a rigorous model that accounts for the spatial correlation of methylation levels, sequence depth and biological variation. We demonstrate that using information from neighboring CG sites, biological variation can be estimated accurately even without replicates. DMR detection is then carried out via a Wald test procedure. Simulations demonstrate that DSS-single has greater sensitivity and accuracy than existing methods, and an analysis of H1 versus IMR90 cell lines suggests that it also yields the most biologically meaningful results. DSS-single is implemented in the Bioconductor package DSS.
26176536	0	2015	PLoS One	swDMR: A Sliding Window Approach to Identify Differentially Methylated Regions Based on Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing.	DNA methylation is a widespread epigenetic modification that plays an essential role in gene expression through transcriptional regulation and chromatin remodeling. The emergence of whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) represents an important milestone in the detection of DNA methylation. Characterization of differential methylated regions (DMRs) is fundamental as well for further functional analysis. In this study, we present swDMR (http://sourceforge.net/projects/swdmr/) for the comprehensive analysis of DMRs from whole genome methylation profiles by a sliding window approach. It is an integrated tool designed for WGBS data, which not only implements accessible statistical methods to perform hypothesis test adapted to two or more samples without replicates, but false discovery rate was also controlled by multiple test correction. Downstream analysis tools were also provided, including cluster, annotation and visualization modules. In summary, based on WGBS data, swDMR can produce abundant information of differential methylated regions. As a convenient and flexible tool, we believe swDMR will bring us closer to unveil the potential functional regions involved in epigenetic regulation.
26100871	0	2015	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Genetic and epigenetic architecture of sex-biased expression in the jewel wasps Nasonia vitripennis and giraulti.	There is extraordinary diversity in sexual dimorphism (SD) among animals, but little is known about its epigenetic basis. To study the epigenetic architecture of SD in a haplodiploid system, we performed RNA-seq and whole-genome bisulfite sequencing of adult females and males from two closely related parasitoid wasps, Nasonia vitripennis and Nasonia giraulti. More than 75% of expressed genes displayed significantly sex-biased expression. As a consequence, expression profiles are more similar between species within each sex than between sexes within each species. Furthermore, extremely male- and female-biased genes are enriched for totally different functional categories: male-biased genes for key enzymes in sex-pheromone synthesis and female-biased genes for genes involved in epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Remarkably, just 70 highly expressed, extremely male-biased genes account for 10% of all transcripts in adult males. Unlike expression profiles, DNA methylomes are highly similar between sexes within species, with no consistent sex differences in methylation found. Therefore, methylation changes cannot explain the extensive level of sex-biased gene expression observed. Female-biased genes have smaller sequence divergence between species, higher conservation to other hymenopterans, and a broader expression range across development. Overall, female-biased genes have been recruited from genes with more conserved and broadly expressing &quot;house-keeping&quot; functions, whereas male-biased genes are more recently evolved and are predominately testis specific. In summary, Nasonia accomplish a striking degree of sex-biased expression without sex chromosomes or epigenetic differences in methylation. We propose that methylation provides a general signal for constitutive gene expression, whereas other sex-specific signals cause sex-biased gene expression.
26072424	0	2015	Plant Mol Biol	Accurate CpG and non-CpG cytosine methylation analysis by high-throughput locus-specific pyrosequencing in plants.	Pyrosequencing permits accurate quantification of DNA methylation of specific regions where the proportions of the C/T polymorphism induced by sodium bisulfite treatment of DNA reflects the DNA methylation level. The commercially available high-throughput locus-specific pyrosequencing instruments allow for the simultaneous analysis of 96 samples, but restrict the DNA methylation analysis to CpG dinucleotide sites, which can be limiting in many biological systems. In contrast to mammals where DNA methylation occurs nearly exclusively on CpG dinucleotides, plants genomes harbor DNA methylation also in other sequence contexts including CHG and CHH motives, which cannot be evaluated by these pyrosequencing instruments due to software limitations. Here, we present a complete pipeline for accurate CpG and non-CpG cytosine methylation analysis at single base-resolution using high-throughput locus-specific pyrosequencing. The devised approach includes the design and validation of PCR amplification on bisulfite-treated DNA and pyrosequencing assays as well as the quantification of the methylation level at every cytosine from the raw peak intensities of the Pyrograms by two newly developed Visual Basic Applications. Our method presents accurate and reproducible results as exemplified by the cytosine methylation analysis of the promoter regions of two Tomato genes (NOR and CNR) encoding transcription regulators of fruit ripening during different stages of fruit development. Our results confirmed a significant and temporally coordinated loss of DNA methylation on specific cytosines during the early stages of fruit development in both promoters as previously shown by WGBS. The manuscript describes thus the first high-throughput locus-specific DNA methylation analysis in plants using pyrosequencing.
26036609	0	2015	Epigenetics	A systematic study of normalization methods for Infinium 450K methylation data using whole-genome bisulfite sequencing data.	DNA methylation plays an important role in disease etiology. The Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 (450K) BeadChip is a widely used platform in large-scale epidemiologic studies. This platform can efficiently and simultaneously measure methylation levels at ∼480,000 CpG sites in the human genome in multiple study samples. Due to the intrinsic chip design of 2 types of chemistry probes, data normalization or preprocessing is a critical step to consider before data analysis. To date, numerous methods and pipelines have been developed for this purpose, and some studies have been conducted to evaluate different methods. However, validation studies have often been limited to a small number of CpG sites to reduce the variability in technical replicates. In this study, we measured methylation on a set of samples using both whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) and 450K chips. We used WGBS data as a gold standard of true methylation states in cells to compare the performances of 8 normalization methods for 450K data on a genome-wide scale. Analyses on our dataset indicate that the most effective methods are peak-based correction (PBC) and quantile normalization plus β-mixture quantile normalization (QN.BMIQ). To our knowledge, this is the first study to systematically compare existing normalization methods for Illumina 450K data using novel WGBS data. Our results provide a benchmark reference for the analysis of DNA methylation chip data, particularly in white blood cells.
26004067	0	2015	Cell	DNA Demethylation Dynamics in the Human Prenatal Germline.	Global DNA demethylation in humans is a fundamental process that occurs in pre-implantation embryos and reversion to naive ground state pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). However, the extent of DNA methylation reprogramming in human germline cells is unknown. Here, we performed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) and RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) of human prenatal germline cells from 53 to 137 days of development. We discovered that the transcriptome and methylome of human germline is distinct from both human PSCs and the inner cell mass (ICM) of human blastocysts. Using this resource to monitor the outcome of global DNA demethylation with reversion of primed PSCs to the naive ground state, we uncovered hotspots of ultralow methylation at transposons that are protected from demethylation in the germline and ICM. Taken together, the human germline serves as a valuable in vivo tool for monitoring the epigenome of cells that have emerged from a global DNA demethylation event.
25974955	0	2015	IEEE J Biomed Health Inform	Regulatory Elements in Low-Methylated Regions Predict Directional Change of Gene Expression.	Recent studies on methylomes obtained from the whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) indicate that lowmethylated regions (LMRs) are related to potential active distal regulatory regions such as enhancers in mammalian genomes. To investigate the potential effect of regulatory elements in LMRs on gene expression, we proposed penalized logistic regression models to predict the directional change of differentially expressed genes using predicted transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) in LMRs that are distinctive between two cell types. We evaluated our models on four cell types where the WGBS and RNA-seq data were available. The average area under the ROC curve (AUC) from the 10-fold cross-validation was computed over the 6 pairs of cell types in each model. The models using TFBSs in LMRs in intergenic or genebody region are more predictive (AUC 0.71 and 0.66 respectively) compared with the one using TFBSs from promoter regions alone (AUC 0.62). When using a model that combines TFBSs in LMRs from both intergenic and genebody regions, the best prediction was obtained (AUC 0.78). Our models are capable of identifying subsets of LMRs that are significantly enriched for the ChIP-seq binding sites of the insulator protein CTCF and p300 co-activator and other transcription factors. Our framework provides further evidences of putative distal regulatory elements from LMRs located in intergenic and genebody regions.
25928765	0	2015	BMC Bioinformatics	coMET: visualisation of regional epigenome-wide association scan results and DNA co-methylation patterns.	BACKGROUND: Epigenome-wide association scans (EWAS) are an increasingly powerful and widely-used approach to assess the role of epigenetic variation in human complex traits. However, this rapidly emerging field lacks dedicated visualisation tools that can display features specific to epigenetic datasets.RESULT: We developed coMET, an R package and online tool for visualisation of EWAS results in a genomic region of interest. coMET generates a regional plot of epigenetic-phenotype association results and the estimated DNA methylation correlation between CpG sites (co-methylation), with further options to visualise genomic annotations based on ENCODE data, gene tracks, reference CpG-sites, and user-defined features. The tool can be used to display phenotype association signals and correlation patterns of microarray or sequencing-based DNA methylation data, such as Illumina Infinium 450k, WGBS, or MeDIP-seq, as well as other types of genomic data, such as gene expression profiles. The software is available as a user-friendly online tool from http://epigen.kcl.ac.uk/comet and as an R Bioconductor package. Source code, examples, and full documentation are also available from GitHub.CONCLUSION: Our new software allows visualisation of EWAS results with functional genomic annotations and with estimation of co-methylation patterns. coMET is available to a wide audience as an online tool and R package, and can be a valuable resource to interpret results in the fast growing field of epigenetics. The software is designed for epigenetic data, but can also be applied to genomic and functional genomic datasets in any species.
25788985	0	2015	Epigenetics Chromatin	Genome-wide assays that identify and quantify modified cytosines in human disease studies.	The number of different assays that has been published to study DNA methylation is extensive, complemented by recently described assays that test modifications of cytosine other than the most abundant 5-methylcytosine (5mC) variant. In this review, we describe the considerations involved in choosing how to study 5mC throughout the genome, with an emphasis on the common application of testing for epigenetic dysregulation in human disease. While microarray studies of 5mC continue to be commonly used, these lack the additional qualitative information from sequencing-based approaches that is increasingly recognized to be valuable. When we test the representation of functional elements in the human genome by several current assay types, we find that no survey approach interrogates anything more than a small minority of the nonpromoter cis-regulatory sites where DNA methylation variability is now appreciated to influence gene expression and to be associated with human disease. However, whole-genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS) adds a substantial representation of loci at which DNA methylation changes are unlikely to be occurring with transcriptional consequences. Our assessment is that the most effective approach to DNA methylation studies in human diseases is to use targeted bisulphite sequencing of the cis-regulatory loci in a cell type of interest, using a capture-based or comparable system, and that no single design of a survey approach will be suitable for all cell types.
25777524	0	2015	Bioinformatics	WGBSSuite: simulating whole-genome bisulphite sequencing data and benchmarking differential DNA methylation analysis tools.	MOTIVATION: As the number of studies looking at differences between DNA methylation increases, there is a growing demand to develop and benchmark statistical methods to analyse these data. To date no objective approach for the comparison of these methods has been developed and as such it remains difficult to assess which analysis tool is most appropriate for a given experiment. As a result, there is an unmet need for a DNA methylation data simulator that can accurately reproduce a wide range of experimental setups, and can be routinely used to compare the performance of different statistical models.RESULTS: We have developed WGBSSuite, a flexible stochastic simulation tool that generates single-base resolution DNA methylation data genome-wide. Several simulator parameters can be derived directly from real datasets provided by the user in order to mimic real case scenarios. Thus, it is possible to choose the most appropriate statistical analysis tool for a given simulated design. To show the usefulness of our simulator, we also report a benchmark of commonly used methods for differential methylation analysis.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: WGBS code and documentation are available under GNU licence at http://www.wgbssuite.org.uk/CONTACT: : owen.rackham@imperial.ac.uk or l.bottolo@imperial.ac.ukSUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
25732828	0	2015	Cell Rep	Single-cell DNA methylome sequencing and bioinformatic inference of epigenomic cell-state dynamics.	Methods for single-cell genome and transcriptome sequencing have contributed to our understanding of cellular heterogeneity, whereas methods for single-cell epigenomics are much less established. Here, we describe a whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) assay that enables DNA methylation mapping in very small cell populations (μWGBS) and single cells (scWGBS). Our assay is optimized for profiling many samples at low coverage, and we describe a bioinformatic method that analyzes collections of single-cell methylomes to infer cell-state dynamics. Using these technological advances, we studied epigenomic cell-state dynamics in three in vitro models of cellular differentiation and pluripotency, where we observed characteristic patterns of epigenome remodeling and cell-to-cell heterogeneity. The described method enables single-cell analysis of DNA methylation in a broad range of biological systems, including embryonic development, stem cell differentiation, and cancer. It can also be used to establish composite methylomes that account for cell-to-cell heterogeneity in complex tissue samples.
25687465	0	2015	Epigenomics	Improved tagmentation-based whole-genome bisulfite sequencing for input DNA from less than 100 mammalian cells.	AIM: To develop a whole-genome methylation sequencing method that fulfills the needs for studies using ultra-low-input DNA.MATERIALS &amp; METHODS: The tagmentation-based whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (T-WGBS) technology is modified, enabling stable library construction with complexity from minimally 0.5 ng of initial genomic DNA, which equals less than 100 mammalian cells.RESULTS: We thoroughly assessed the performance of this T-WGBS method by sequencing the methylomes of a rice strain and pre-implantation embryos of rhesus monkey and compare to traditional WGBS approach, thereby demonstrating the efficacy of this new approach.CONCLUSION: This new approach is highly attractive for the complete methylome analysis of very few cells, for example, mammalian pre-implantation embryos, or tiny human biopsy specimens.
25638564	0	2015	Mol Plant	Crop Epigenomics: Identifying, Unlocking, and Harnessing Cryptic Variation in Crop Genomes.	DNA methylation is a key chromatin modification in plant genomes that is meiotically and mitotically heritable, and at times is associated with gene expression and morphological variation. Benefiting from the increased availability of high-quality reference genome assemblies and methods to profile single-base resolution DNA methylation states, DNA methylomes for many crop species are available. These efforts are making it possible to begin answering crucial questions, including understanding the role of DNA methylation in developmental processes, its role in crop species evolution, and whether DNA methylation is dynamically altered and heritable in response to changes in the environment. These genome-wide maps provide evidence for the existence of silent epialleles in plant genomes which, once identified, can be targeted for reactivation leading to phenotypic variation.
25553811	0	2015	J Bioinform Comput Biol	AKSmooth: enhancing low-coverage bisulfite sequencing data via kernel-based smoothing.	Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) is an approach of growing importance. It is the only approach that provides a comprehensive picture of the genome-wide DNA methylation profile. However, obtaining a sufficient amount of genome and read coverage typically requires high sequencing costs. Bioinformatics tools can reduce this cost burden by improving the quality of sequencing data. We have developed a statistical method Ajusted Local Kernel Smoother (AKSmooth) that can accurately and efficiently reconstruct the single CpG methylation estimate across the entire methylome using low-coverage bisulfite sequencing (Bi-Seq) data. We demonstrate the AKSmooth performance on the low-coverage (~ 4 ×) DNA methylation profiles of three human colon cancer samples and matched controls. Under the best set of parameters, AKSmooth-curated data showed high concordance with the gold standard high-coverage sample (Pearson 0.90), outperforming the popular analogous method. In addition, AKSmooth showed computational efficiency with runtime benchmark over 4.5 times better than the reference tool. To summarize, AKSmooth is a simple and efficient tool that can provide an accurate human colon methylome estimation profile from low-coverage WGBS data. The proposed method is implemented in R and is available at https://github.com/Junfang/AKSmooth.
25223896	5	2014	Genes Dev	Role of Tet proteins in enhancer activity and telomere elongation.	DNA methylation at the C-5 position of cytosine (5mC) is one of the best-studied epigenetic modifications and plays important roles in diverse biological processes. Iterative oxidation of 5mC by the ten-eleven translocation (Tet) family of proteins generates 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), 5-formylcytosine (5fC), and 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC). 5fC and 5caC are selectively recognized and excised by thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG), leading to DNA demethylation. Functional characterization of Tet proteins has been complicated by the redundancy between the three family members. Using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, we generated mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) deficient for all three Tet proteins (Tet triple knockout [TKO]). Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) analysis revealed that Tet-mediated DNA demethylation mainly occurs at distally located enhancers and fine-tunes the transcription of genes associated with these regions. Functional characterization of Tet TKO ESCs revealed a role for Tet proteins in regulating the two-cell embryo (2C)-like state under ESC culture conditions. In addition, Tet TKO ESCs exhibited increased telomere-sister chromatid exchange and elongated telomeres. Collectively, our study reveals a role for Tet proteins in not only DNA demethylation at enhancers but also regulating the 2C-like state and telomere homeostasis.
24608764	5	2014	Bioinformatics	DMAP: differential methylation analysis package for RRBS and WGBS data.	MOTIVATION: The rapid development of high-throughput sequencing technologies has enabled epigeneticists to quantify DNA methylation on a massive scale. Progressive increase in sequencing capacity present challenges in terms of processing analysis and the interpretation of the large amount of data; investigating differential methylation between genome-scale data from multiple samples highlights this challenge.RESULTS: We have developed a differential methylation analysis package (DMAP) to generate coverage-filtered reference methylomes and to identify differentially methylated regions across multiple samples from reduced representation bisulphite sequencing and whole genome bisulphite sequencing experiments. We introduce a novel fragment-based approach for investigating DNA methylation patterns for reduced representation bisulphite sequencing data. Further, DMAP provides the identity of gene and CpG features and distances to the differentially methylated regions in a format that is easily analyzed with limited bioinformatics knowledge.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The software has been implemented in C and has been written to ensure portability between different platforms. The source code and documentation is freely available (DMAP: as compressed TAR archive folder) from http://biochem.otago.ac.nz/research/databases-software/. Two test datasets are also available for download from the Web site. Test dataset 1 contains reads from chromosome 1 of a patient and a control, which is used for comparative analysis in the current article. Test dataset 2 contains reads from a part of chromosome 21 of three disease and three control samples for testing the operation of DMAP, especially for the analysis of variance. Example commands for the analyses are included.
24717538	4	2014	Epigenetics	The evidence for functional non-CpG methylation in mammalian cells.	In mammalian genomes, the methylation of cytosine residues within CpG dinucleotides is crucial to normal development and cell differentiation. However, methylation of cytosines in the contexts of CpA, CpT, and CpC (non-CpG methylation) has been reported for decades, yet remains poorly understood. In recent years, whole genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS) has confirmed significant levels of non-CpG methylation in specific tissues and cell types. Non-CpG methylation has several properties that distinguish it from CpG methylation. Here we review the literature describing non-CpG methylation in mammalian cells, describe the important characteristics that distinguish it from CpG methylation, and discuss its functional importance.
25448294	2	2014	Methods	Combining MeDIP-seq and MRE-seq to investigate genome-wide CpG methylation.	DNA CpG methylation is a widespread epigenetic mark in high eukaryotes including mammals. DNA methylation plays key roles in diverse biological processes such as X chromosome inactivation, transposable element repression, genomic imprinting, and control of gene expression. Recent advancements in sequencing-based DNA methylation profiling methods provide an unprecedented opportunity to measure DNA methylation in a genome-wide fashion, making it possible to comprehensively investigate the role of DNA methylation. Several methods have been developed, such as Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing (WGBS), Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS), and enrichment-based methods including Methylation Dependent ImmunoPrecipitation followed by sequencing (MeDIP-seq), methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) protein-enriched genome sequencing (MBD-seq), methyltransferase-directed Transfer of Activated Groups followed by sequencing (mTAG), and Methylation-sensitive Restriction Enzyme digestion followed by sequencing (MRE-seq). These methods differ by their genomic CpG coverage, resolution, quantitative accuracy, cost, and software for analyzing the data. Among these, WGBS is considered the gold standard. However, it is still a cost-prohibitive technology for a typical laboratory due to the required sequencing depth. We found that by integrating two enrichment-based methods that are complementary in nature (i.e., MeDIP-seq and MRE-seq), we can significantly increase the efficiency of whole DNA methylome profiling. By using two recently developed computational algorithms (i.e., M&amp;M and methylCRF), the combination of MeDIP-seq and MRE-seq produces genome-wide CpG methylation measurement at high coverage and high resolution, and robust predictions of differentially methylated regions. Thus, the combination of the two enrichment-based methods provides a cost-effective alternative to WGBS. In this article we describe both the experimental protocols for performing MeDIP-seq and MRE-seq, and the computational protocols for running M&amp;M and methylCRF.
25374580	1	2014	Front Genet	Methylated DNA is over-represented in whole-genome bisulfite sequencing data.	The development of whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) has resulted in a number of exciting discoveries about the role of DNA methylation leading to a plethora of novel testable hypotheses. Methods for constructing sodium bisulfite-converted and amplified libraries have recently advanced to the point that the bottleneck for experiments that use WGBS has shifted to data analysis and interpretation. Here we present empirical evidence for an over-representation of reads from methylated DNA in WGBS. This enrichment for methylated DNA is exacerbated by higher cycles of PCR and is influenced by the type of uracil-insensitive DNA polymerase used for amplifying the sequencing library. Future efforts to computationally correct for this enrichment bias will be essential to increasing the accuracy of determining methylation levels for individual cytosines. It is especially critical for studies that seek to accurately quantify DNA methylation levels in populations that may segregate for allelic DNA methylation states.
24860595	1	2014	Front Genet	Exploring genome wide bisulfite sequencing for DNA methylation analysis in livestock: a technical assessment.	Recent advances made in &quot;omics&quot; technologies are contributing to a revolution in livestock selection and breeding practices. Epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methylation are important determinants for the control of gene expression in mammals. DNA methylation research will help our understanding of how environmental factors contribute to phenotypic variation of complex production and health traits. High-throughput sequencing is a vital tool for the comprehensive analysis of DNA methylation, and bisulfite-based strategies coupled with DNA sequencing allows for quantitative, site-specific methylation analysis at the genome level or genome wide. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) and more recently whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) have proven to be effective techniques for studying DNA methylation in both humans and mice. Here we report the development of RRBS and WGBS for use in sheep, the first application of this technology in livestock species. Important technical issues associated with these methodologies including fragment size selection and sequence depth are examined and discussed.
25421685	0	2014	Methods Mol Biol	Global DNA methylation profiling technologies and the ovarian cancer methylome.	Cytosine methylation in DNA constitutes an important epigenetic layer of transcriptional and regulatory control in many eukaryotes. Profiling DNA methylation across the genome is critical to understanding the influence of epigenetics in normal biology and disease, such as cancer. Genome-wide analyses such as arrays and next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have been used to assess large fractions of the methylome at a single-base-pair resolution. However, the range of DNA methylation profiling techniques can make selecting the appropriate protocol a challenge. This chapter discusses the advantages and disadvantages of various methylome detection approaches to assess which is appropriate for the question at hand. Here, we focus on four prominent genome-wide approaches: whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS); methyl-binding domain capture sequencing (MBDCap-Seq); reduced-representation-bisulfite-sequencing (RRBS); and Infinium Methylation450 BeadChips (450 K, Illumina). We discuss some of the requirements, merits, and challenges that should be considered when choosing a methylome technology to ensure that it will be informative. In addition, we show how genome-wide methylation detection arrays and high-throughput sequencing have provided immense insight into ovarian cancer-specific methylation signatures that may serve as diagnostic biomarkers or predict patient response to epigenetic therapy.
25362363	0	2014	Nat Methods	Coverage recommendations for methylation analysis by whole-genome bisulfite sequencing.	Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) allows genome-wide DNA methylation profiling, but the associated high sequencing costs continue to limit its widespread application. We used several high-coverage reference data sets to experimentally determine minimal sequencing requirements. We present data-derived recommendations for minimum sequencing depth for WGBS libraries, highlight what is gained with increasing coverage and discuss the trade-off between sequencing depth and number of assayed replicates.
25324297	0	2014	DNA Res	Highly sensitive targeted methylome sequencing by post-bisulfite adaptor tagging.	The current gold standard method for methylome analysis is whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS), but its cost is substantial, especially for the purpose of multi-sample comparison of large methylomes. Shotgun bisulfite sequencing of target-enriched DNA, or targeted methylome sequencing (TMS), can be a flexible, cost-effective alternative to WGBS. However, the current TMS protocol requires a considerable amount of input DNA and hence is hardly applicable to samples of limited quantity. Here we report a method to overcome this limitation by using post-bisulfite adaptor tagging (PBAT), in which adaptor tagging is conducted after bisulfite treatment to circumvent bisulfite-induced loss of intact sequencing templates, thereby enabling TMS of a 100-fold smaller amount of input DNA with far fewer cycles of polymerase chain reaction than in the current protocol. We thus expect that the PBAT-mediated TMS will serve as an invaluable method in epigenomics.
24846966	0	2014	Yi Chuan	[The application of next generation sequencing on epigenetic study].	The application of next generation sequencing (NGS) technique has a great impact on epigenetic studies. Coupled with NGS, a number of sequencing-based methodologies have been developed and applied in epigenetic studies, such as Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing (WGBS), Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS), Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation Sequencing (MeDIP-seq), Chromatin Immunoprecipitation-Sequencing (ChIP-seq), TAB-seq (Tet-assisted Bisulfite Sequencing), Chromosome Conformation Capture Sequencing (3C-seq) and various of 3C-seq de-rivatives, DNase1-seq/MNase-seq/FAIRE-seqand RNA Sequencing (RNA-seq). These new techniques were used to iden-tify DNA methylation patterns and a broad range of protein/nucleic acid interactions, and to analyze chromatin conforma-tion.With these new technologies, researchers have gained a broader view and better tools to investigate the distributions and dynamic changes of epigenetic markers affected by both internal and external factors. The principles and characteristics of major applications of NGS technologies on epigenetics were summarized; and the recent advances and the future direc-tions in NGS-based epigenetic studies were further discussed.
24497972	0	2014	PLoS One	WBSA: web service for bisulfite sequencing data analysis.	Whole-Genome Bisulfite Sequencing (WGBS) and genome-wide Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS) are widely used to study DNA methylation. However, data analysis is complicated, lengthy, and hampered by a lack of seamless analytical pipelines. To address these issues, we developed a convenient, stable, and efficient web service called Web Service for Bisulfite Sequencing Data Analysis (WBSA) to analyze bisulfate sequencing data. WBSA focuses on not only CpG methylation, which is the most common biochemical modification in eukaryotic DNA, but also non-CG methylation, which have been observed in plants, iPS cells, oocytes, neurons and stem cells of human. WBSA comprises three main modules as follows: WGBS data analysis, RRBS data analysis, and differentially methylated region (DMR) identification. The WGBS and RRBS modules execute read mapping, methylation site identification, annotation, and advanced analysis, whereas the DMR module identifies actual DMRs and annotates their correlations to genes. WBSA can be accessed and used without charge either online or local version. WBSA also includes the executables of the Portable Batch System (PBS) and standalone versions that can be downloaded from the website together with the installation instructions. WBSA is available at no charge for academic users at http://wbsa.big.ac.cn.
23850244	34	2013	Cell Stem Cell	Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing of two distinct interconvertible DNA methylomes of mouse embryonic stem cells.	The use of two kinase inhibitors (2i) enables derivation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in the pluripotent ground state. Using whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS), we show that male 2i ESCs are globally hypomethylated compared to conventional ESCs maintained in serum. In serum, female ESCs are hypomethyated similarly to male ESCs in 2i, and DNA methylation is further reduced in 2i. Regions with elevated DNA methylation in 2i strongly correlate with the presence of H3K9me3 on endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) and imprinted loci. The methylome of male ESCs in serum parallels postimplantation blastocyst cells, while 2i stalls ESCs in a hypomethylated, ICM-like state. WGBS analysis during adaptation of 2i ESCs to serum suggests that deposition of DNA methylation is largely random, while loss of DNA methylation during reversion to 2i occurs passively, initiating at TET1 binding sites. Together, our analysis provides insight into DNA methylation dynamics in cultured ESCs paralleling early developmental processes.
23804400	19	2013	Genome Res	Functional DNA methylation differences between tissues, cell types, and across individuals discovered using the M&amp;M algorithm.	DNA methylation plays key roles in diverse biological processes such as X chromosome inactivation, transposable element repression, genomic imprinting, and tissue-specific gene expression. Sequencing-based DNA methylation profiling provides an unprecedented opportunity to map and compare complete DNA methylomes. This includes one of the most widely applied technologies for measuring DNA methylation: methylated DNA immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (MeDIP-seq), coupled with a complementary method, methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme sequencing (MRE-seq). A computational approach that integrates data from these two different but complementary assays and predicts methylation differences between samples has been unavailable. Here, we present a novel integrative statistical framework M&amp;M (for integration of MeDIP-seq and MRE-seq) that dynamically scales, normalizes, and combines MeDIP-seq and MRE-seq data to detect differentially methylated regions. Using sample-matched whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) as a gold standard, we demonstrate superior accuracy and reproducibility of M&amp;M compared to existing analytical methods for MeDIP-seq data alone. M&amp;M leverages the complementary nature of MeDIP-seq and MRE-seq data to allow rapid comparative analysis between whole methylomes at a fraction of the cost of WGBS. Comprehensive analysis of nineteen human DNA methylomes with M&amp;M reveals distinct DNA methylation patterns among different tissue types, cell types, and individuals, potentially underscoring divergent epigenetic regulation at different scales of phenotypic diversity. We find that differential DNA methylation at enhancer elements, with concurrent changes in histone modifications and transcription factor binding, is common at the cell, tissue, and individual levels, whereas promoter methylation is more prominent in reinforcing fundamental tissue identities.
24206606	15	2013	BMC Genomics	BS-Seeker2: a versatile aligning pipeline for bisulfite sequencing data.	BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification involved in many biological processes. Bisulfite treatment coupled with high-throughput sequencing provides an effective approach for studying genome-wide DNA methylation at base resolution. Libraries such as whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) and reduced represented bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) are widely used for generating DNA methylomes, demanding efficient and versatile tools for aligning bisulfite sequencing data.RESULTS: We have developed BS-Seeker2, an updated version of BS Seeker, as a full pipeline for mapping bisulfite sequencing data and generating DNA methylomes. BS-Seeker2 improves mappability over existing aligners by using local alignment. It can also map reads from RRBS library by building special indexes with improved efficiency and accuracy. Moreover, BS-Seeker2 provides additional function for filtering out reads with incomplete bisulfite conversion, which is useful in minimizing the overestimation of DNA methylation levels. We also defined CGmap and ATCGmap file formats for full representations of DNA methylomes, as part of the outputs of BS-Seeker2 pipeline together with BAM and WIG files.CONCLUSIONS: Our evaluations on the performance show that BS-Seeker2 works efficiently and accurately for both WGBS data and RRBS data. BS-Seeker2 is freely available at http://pellegrini.mcdb.ucla.edu/BS_Seeker2/ and the Galaxy server.
23804401	15	2013	Genome Res	Estimating absolute methylation levels at single-CpG resolution from methylation enrichment and restriction enzyme sequencing methods.	Recent advancements in sequencing-based DNA methylation profiling methods provide an unprecedented opportunity to map complete DNA methylomes. These include whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS, MethylC-seq, or BS-seq), reduced-representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS), and enrichment-based methods such as MeDIP-seq, MBD-seq, and MRE-seq. These methods yield largely comparable results but differ significantly in extent of genomic CpG coverage, resolution, quantitative accuracy, and cost, at least while using current algorithms to interrogate the data. None of these existing methods provides single-CpG resolution, comprehensive genome-wide coverage, and cost feasibility for a typical laboratory. We introduce methylCRF, a novel conditional random fields-based algorithm that integrates methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP-seq) and methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme (MRE-seq) sequencing data to predict DNA methylation levels at single-CpG resolution. Our method is a combined computational and experimental strategy to produce DNA methylomes of all 28 million CpGs in the human genome for a fraction (&lt;10%) of the cost of whole-genome bisulfite sequencing methods. methylCRF was benchmarked for accuracy against Infinium arrays, RRBS, WGBS sequencing, and locus-specific bisulfite sequencing performed on the same human embryonic stem cell line. methylCRF transformation of MeDIP-seq/MRE-seq was equivalent to a biological replicate of WGBS in quantification, coverage, and resolution. We used conventional bisulfite conversion, PCR, cloning, and sequencing to validate loci where our predictions do not agree with whole-genome bisulfite data, and in 11 out of 12 cases, methylCRF predictions of methylation level agree better with validated results than does whole-genome bisulfite sequencing. Therefore, methylCRF transformation of MeDIP-seq/MRE-seq data provides an accurate, inexpensive, and widely accessible strategy to create full DNA methylomes.
24071908	8	2013	Nat Protoc	Tagmentation-based whole-genome bisulfite sequencing.	Epigenetic modifications such as carbon 5 methylation of the cytosine base in a CpG dinucleotide context are involved in the onset and progression of human diseases. A comprehensive understanding of the role of genome-wide DNA methylation patterns, the methylome, requires quantitative determination of the methylation states of all CpG sites in a genome. So far, analyses of the complete methylome by whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) are rare because of the required large DNA quantities, substantial bioinformatic resources and high sequencing costs. Here we describe a detailed protocol for tagmentation-based WGBS (T-WGBS) and demonstrate its reliability in comparison with conventional WGBS. In T-WGBS, a hyperactive Tn5 transposase fragments the DNA and appends sequencing adapters in a single step. T-WGBS requires not more than 20 ng of input DNA; hence, the protocol allows the comprehensive methylome analysis of limited amounts of DNA isolated from precious biological specimens. The T-WGBS library preparation takes 2 d.
24270503	1	2013	Mol Plant	Covering your bases: inheritance of DNA methylation in plant genomes.	Cytosine methylation is an important base modification that is inherited across mitotic and meiotic cell divisions in plant genomes. Heritable methylation variants can contribute to within-species phenotypic variation. Few methylation variants were known until recently, making it possible to begin to address major unanswered questions: the extent of natural methylation variation within plant genomes, its effects on phenotypic variation, its degree of dependence on genotype, and how it fits into an evolutionary context. Techniques like whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) make it possible to determine cytosine methylation states at single-base resolution across entire genomes and populations. Application of this method to natural and novel experimental populations is revealing answers to these long-standing questions about the role of DNA methylation in plant genomes.
23975794	0	2013	Methods Mol Biol	Evaluation of MeDIP-chip in the context of whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS-seq) in Arabidopsis.	Studies of DNA methylation in Arabidopsis have rapidly advanced from the analysis of a single reference accession to investigations of large populations. The goal of emerging population studies is to detect differentially methylated regions (DMRs) at the genome-wide scale, and to relate this variation to gene expression and phenotypic diversity.Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS-seq) has established itself as a gold standard in DNA methylation analysis due to its high accuracy and single cytosine measurement resolution. However, scaling up the use of this technology for large population studies is currently not only cost prohibitive but also poses nontrivial bioinformatic challenges. If the end-point of the study is to detect DMRs at the level of several hundred base pairs rather than at the level of single cytosines, low-resolution array-based methods, such as MeDIP-chip, may be entirely sufficient. However, the trade-off between measurement accuracy and experimental/analytical practicality needs to be weighted carefully. To help make such experimental choices, we conducted a side-by-side comparison between the popular dual-channel MeDIP-chip Nimblegen technology and Illumina WGBS-seq in two independent Arabidopsis lines.Our analysis shows that MeDIP-chip performs reasonably well in detecting DNA methylation at probe-level resolution, yielding a genome-wide combined false-positive and false-negative rate of about 0.21. However, detection can be susceptible to strong signal distortions resulting from a combination of dye bias and the CG content of effectively unmethylated genomic regions. We show that these issues can be easily bypassed by taking appropriate data preparation steps and applying suitable analysis tools.We conclude that MeDIP-chip is a reasonable alternative to WGBS-seq in emerging Arabidopsis population epigenetic studies.
22689993	91	2012	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Distinct DNA methylomes of newborns and centenarians.	Human aging cannot be fully understood in terms of the constrained genetic setting. Epigenetic drift is an alternative means of explaining age-associated alterations. To address this issue, we performed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) of newborn and centenarian genomes. The centenarian DNA had a lower DNA methylation content and a reduced correlation in the methylation status of neighboring cytosine--phosphate--guanine (CpGs) throughout the genome in comparison with the more homogeneously methylated newborn DNA. The more hypomethylated CpGs observed in the centenarian DNA compared with the neonate covered all genomic compartments, such as promoters, exonic, intronic, and intergenic regions. For regulatory regions, the most hypomethylated sequences in the centenarian DNA were present mainly at CpG-poor promoters and in tissue-specific genes, whereas a greater level of DNA methylation was observed in CpG island promoters. We extended the study to a larger cohort of newborn and nonagenarian samples using a 450,000 CpG-site DNA methylation microarray that reinforced the observation of more hypomethylated DNA sequences in the advanced age group. WGBS and 450,000 analyses of middle-age individuals demonstrated DNA methylomes in the crossroad between the newborn and the nonagenarian/centenarian groups. Our study constitutes a unique DNA methylation analysis of the extreme points of human life at a single-nucleotide resolution level.
22649061	17	2012	Nucleic Acids Res	Amplification-free whole-genome bisulfite sequencing by post-bisulfite adaptor tagging.	DNA methylation plays a key role in epigenetic regulation of eukaryotic genomes. Hence the genome-wide distribution of 5-methylcytosine, or the methylome, has been attracting intense attention. In recent years, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) has enabled methylome analysis at single-base resolution. However, WGBS typically requires microgram quantities of DNA as well as global PCR amplification, thereby precluding its application to samples of limited amounts. This is presumably because bisulfite treatment of adaptor-tagged templates, which is inherent to current WGBS methods, leads to substantial DNA fragmentation. To circumvent the bisulfite-induced loss of intact sequencing templates, we conceived an alternative method termed Post-Bisulfite Adaptor Tagging (PBAT) wherein bisulfite treatment precedes adaptor tagging by two rounds of random primer extension. The PBAT method can generate a substantial number of unamplified reads from as little as subnanogram quantities of DNA. It requires only 100 ng of DNA for amplification-free WGBS of mammalian genomes. Thus, the PBAT method will enable various novel applications that would not otherwise be possible, thereby contributing to the rapidly growing field of epigenomics.
23200671	8	2012	Cancer Lett	Analyzing the cancer methylome through targeted bisulfite sequencing.	Bisulfite conversion of genomic DNA combined with next-generation sequencing (NGS) has become a very effective approach for mapping the whole-genome and sub-genome wide DNA methylation landscapes. However, whole methylome shotgun bisulfite sequencing is still expensive and not suitable for analyzing large numbers of human cancer specimens. Recent advances in the development of targeted bisulfite sequencing approaches offer several attractive alternatives. The characteristics and applications of these methods are discussed in this review article. In addition, the bioinformatic tools that can be used for sequence capture probe design as well as downstream sequence analyses are also addressed.
21839163	195	2011	Genomics	High density DNA methylation array with single CpG site resolution.	We have developed a new generation of genome-wide DNA methylation BeadChip which allows high-throughput methylation profiling of the human genome. The new high density BeadChip can assay over 480K CpG sites and analyze twelve samples in parallel. The innovative content includes coverage of 99% of RefSeq genes with multiple probes per gene, 96% of CpG islands from the UCSC database, CpG island shores and additional content selected from whole-genome bisulfite sequencing data and input from DNA methylation experts. The well-characterized Infinium® Assay is used for analysis of CpG methylation using bisulfite-converted genomic DNA. We applied this technology to analyze DNA methylation in normal and tumor DNA samples and compared results with whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) data obtained for the same samples. Highly comparable DNA methylation profiles were generated by the array and sequencing methods (average R2 of 0.95). The ability to determine genome-wide methylation patterns will rapidly advance methylation research.
14719643	3	2004	Opt Lett	Whispering-gallery-bottle microcavities: the three-dimensional etalon.	In a tapered optical fiber there exist localized light structures that, in analogy to the magnetic bottles used in plasma fusion, can be called whispering-gallery bottles (WGBs). These essentially three-dimensional structures are formed by the spiral rays that experience total internal reflection at the fiber surface and that also bounce along the fiber axis in response to reflection from the regions of tapering. It is shown that the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin quantization rules for the strongly prolate WGBs can be inversed exactly, thus determining the cavity shape from its spectrum. The approximation considered allows one to find the shape of the etalon bottle, which, similar to the one-dimensional Fabry-Perot etalon, contains an unlimited number of equally spaced wave-number eigenvalues. The problem of determining such a non-one-dimensional cavity is not trivial, because such a cavity does not exist among the uniformly filled cavities such as rectangular boxes, cylinders, and spheroids that allow separation of variables. The etalon cavity corresponds to the fiber radius variation p(z) = rho0/cos(deltakz)/, where deltak is the wave-number spacing. The latter result is in excellent agreement with ray-dynamics numerical modeling.
