PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
25976475	0	2015	Genome Biol	Visualizing translocation dynamics and nascent transcript errors in paused RNA polymerases in vivo.	BACKGROUND: Transcription elongation is frequently interrupted by pausing signals in DNA, with downstream effects on gene expression. Transcription errors also induce prolonged pausing, which can lead to a destabilized genome by interfering with DNA replication. Mechanisms of pausing associated with translocation blocks and misincorporation have been characterized in vitro, but not in vivo.RESULTS: We investigate the pausing pattern of RNA polymerase (RNAP) in Escherichia coli by a novel approach, combining native elongating transcript sequencing (NET-seq) with RNase footprinting of the transcripts (RNET-seq). We reveal that the G-dC base pair at the 5' end of the RNA-DNA hybrid interferes with RNAP translocation. The distance between the 5' G-dC base pair and the 3' end of RNA fluctuates over a three-nucleotide width. Thus, the G-dC base pair can induce pausing in post-translocated, pre-translocated, and backtracked states of RNAP. Additionally, a CpG sequence of the template DNA strand spanning the active site of RNAP inhibits elongation and induces G-to-A errors, which leads to backtracking of RNAP. Gre factors efficiently proofread the errors and rescue the backtracked complexes. We also find that pausing events are enriched in the 5' untranslated region and antisense transcription of mRNA genes and are reduced in rRNA genes.CONCLUSIONS: In E. coli, robust transcriptional pausing involves RNAP interaction with G-dC at the upstream end of the RNA-DNA hybrid, which interferes with translocation. CpG DNA sequences induce transcriptional pausing and G-to-A errors.
25910208	0	2015	Cell	Native elongating transcript sequencing reveals human transcriptional activity at nucleotide resolution.	Major features of transcription by human RNA polymerase II (Pol II) remain poorly defined due to a lack of quantitative approaches for visualizing Pol II progress at nucleotide resolution. We developed a simple and powerful approach for performing native elongating transcript sequencing (NET-seq) in human cells that globally maps strand-specific Pol II density at nucleotide resolution. NET-seq exposes a mode of antisense transcription that originates downstream and converges on transcription from the canonical promoter. Convergent transcription is associated with a distinctive chromatin configuration and is characteristic of lower-expressed genes. Integration of NET-seq with genomic footprinting data reveals stereotypic Pol II pausing coincident with transcription factor occupancy. Finally, exons retained in mature transcripts display Pol II pausing signatures that differ markedly from skipped exons, indicating an intrinsic capacity for Pol II to recognize exons with different processing fates. Together, human NET-seq exposes the topography and regulatory complexity of human gene expression.
25910207	0	2015	Cell	Mammalian NET-Seq Reveals Genome-wide Nascent Transcription Coupled to RNA Processing.	Transcription is a highly dynamic process. Consequently, we have developed native elongating transcript sequencing technology for mammalian chromatin (mNET-seq), which generates single-nucleotide resolution, nascent transcription profiles. Nascent RNA was detected in the active site of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) along with associated RNA processing intermediates. In particular, we detected 5'splice site cleavage by the spliceosome, showing that cleaved upstream exon transcripts are associated with Pol II CTD phosphorylated on the serine 5 position (S5P), which is accumulated over downstream exons. Also, depletion of termination factors substantially reduces Pol II pausing at gene ends, leading to termination defects. Notably, termination factors play an additional promoter role by restricting non-productive RNA synthesis in a Pol II CTD S2P-specific manner. Our results suggest that CTD phosphorylation patterns established for yeast transcription are significantly different in mammals. Taken together, mNET-seq provides dynamic and detailed snapshots of the complex events underlying transcription in mammals.
24926020	6	2014	Science	Interactions between RNA polymerase and the &quot;core recognition element&quot; counteract pausing.	Transcription elongation is interrupted by sequences that inhibit nucleotide addition and cause RNA polymerase (RNAP) to pause. Here, by use of native elongating transcript sequencing (NET-seq) and a variant of NET-seq that enables analysis of mutant RNAP derivatives in merodiploid cells (mNET-seq), we analyze transcriptional pausing genome-wide in vivo in Escherichia coli. We identify a consensus pause-inducing sequence element, G₋₁₀Y₋₁G(+1) (where -1 corresponds to the position of the RNA 3' end). We demonstrate that sequence-specific interactions between RNAP core enzyme and a core recognition element (CRE) that stabilize transcription initiation complexes also occur in transcription elongation complexes and facilitate pause read-through by stabilizing RNAP in a posttranslocated register. Our findings identify key sequence determinants of transcriptional pausing and establish that RNAP-CRE interactions modulate pausing.
25407679	0	2014	Elife	Transcription mediated insulation and interference direct gene cluster expression switches.	In yeast, many tandemly arranged genes show peak expression in different phases of the metabolic cycle (YMC) or in different carbon sources, indicative of regulation by a bi-modal switch, but it is not clear how these switches are controlled. Using native elongating transcript analysis (NET-seq), we show that transcription itself is a component of bi-modal switches, facilitating reciprocal expression in gene clusters. HMS2, encoding a growth-regulated transcription factor, switches between sense- or antisense-dominant states that also coordinate up- and down-regulation of transcription at neighbouring genes. Engineering HMS2 reveals alternative mono-, di- or tri-cistronic and antisense transcription units (TUs), using different promoter and terminator combinations, that underlie state-switching. Promoters or terminators are excluded from functional TUs by read-through transcriptional interference, while antisense TUs insulate downstream genes from interference. We propose that the balance of transcriptional insulation and interference at gene clusters facilitates gene expression switches during intracellular and extracellular environmental change.
22470065	5	2012	Curr Protoc Mol Biol	Native elongating transcript sequencing (NET-seq).	Advances in sequencing technology have led to the development of many high-resolution methodologies that observe genomic activity and gene expression. This unit describes such an approach, native elongating transcript sequencing (NET-seq), which reveals the density of RNA polymerase across the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome with single-nucleotide resolution. A procedure for capturing nascent RNA transcripts directly from live cells through their association with the DNA-RNA-RNAP ternary complex is described. A protocol to create DNA libraries from the nascent RNA, allowing the identity and abundance of the 3' end of purified transcripts to be revealed by next generation sequencing, is also provided. By deep sequencing this DNA library, a quantitative measure of RNAP density with single-nucleotide precision is obtained. The quantitative nature of the NET-seq dataset relies on the high efficiency of many steps in the protocol. The steps that are most critical are described with suggestions for monitoring their success.
21248844	129	2011	Nature	Nascent transcript sequencing visualizes transcription at nucleotide resolution.	Recent studies of transcription have revealed a level of complexity not previously appreciated even a few years ago, both in the intricate use of post-initiation control and the mass production of rapidly degraded transcripts. Dissection of these pathways requires strategies for precisely following transcripts as they are being produced. Here we present an approach (native elongating transcript sequencing, NET-seq), based on deep sequencing of 3' ends of nascent transcripts associated with RNA polymerase, to monitor transcription at nucleotide resolution. Application of NET-seq in Saccharomyces cerevisiae reveals that although promoters are generally capable of divergent transcription, the Rpd3S deacetylation complex enforces strong directionality to most promoters by suppressing antisense transcript initiation. Our studies also reveal pervasive polymerase pausing and backtracking throughout the body of transcripts. Average pause density shows prominent peaks at each of the first four nucleosomes, with the peak location occurring in good agreement with in vitro biophysical measurements. Thus, nucleosome-induced pausing represents a major barrier to transcriptional elongation in vivo.
