PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
26172871	0	2015	Gene	Identification and functional annotation of lncRNA genes with hypermethylation in colorectal cancer.	Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of mortality worldwide. DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification for CRC. Although currently a number of studies about DNA methylation of protein coding genes have been carried out, only a few are about the methylation of genes encoding the long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). In this study, we identified 761 lncRNA genes with DNA hypermethylation in CRC using a free MethylCap-seq dataset. Integration of lncRNA expression and methylation datasets showed that the expression of lncRNAs is negatively correlated with DNA methylation (p&lt;0.01). Co-methylation network was also constructed to annotate the functions of unknown lncRNAs. Our results showed that a total of 364 lncRNAs were annotated with at least one GO biological process term. The current data-mining work is likely to provide informative clues for biological researchers to further understand the role of lncRNAs in the development of CRC.
25763115	0	2015	Clin Epigenetics	Replicative senescence is associated with nuclear reorganization and with DNA methylation at specific transcription factor binding sites.	BACKGROUND: Primary cells enter replicative senescence after a limited number of cell divisions. This process needs to be considered in cell culture experiments, and it is particularly important for regenerative medicine. Replicative senescence is associated with reproducible changes in DNA methylation (DNAm) at specific sites in the genome. The mechanism that drives senescence-associated DNAm changes remains unknown - it may involve stochastic DNAm drift due to imperfect maintenance of epigenetic marks or it is directly regulated at specific sites in the genome.RESULTS: In this study, we analyzed the reorganization of nuclear architecture and DNAm changes during long-term culture of human fibroblasts and mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). We demonstrate that telomeres shorten and shift towards the nuclear center at later passages. In addition, DNAm profiles, either analyzed by MethylCap-seq or by 450k IlluminaBeadChip technology, revealed consistent senescence-associated hypermethylation in regions associated with H3K27me3, H3K4me3, and H3K4me1 histone marks, whereas hypomethylation was associated with chromatin containing H3K9me3 and lamina-associated domains (LADs). DNA hypermethylation was significantly enriched in the vicinity of genes that are either up- or downregulated at later passages. Furthermore, specific transcription factor binding motifs (e.g. EGR1, TFAP2A, and ETS1) were significantly enriched in differentially methylated regions and in the promoters of differentially expressed genes.CONCLUSIONS: Senescence-associated DNA hypermethylation occurs at specific sites in the genome and reflects functional changes in the course of replicative senescence. These results indicate that tightly regulated epigenetic modifications during long-term culture contribute to changes in nuclear organization and gene expression.
25682867	0	2015	Oncotarget	DNA methylome and transcriptome sequencing in human ovarian granulosa cells links age-related changes in gene expression to gene body methylation and 3'-end GC density.	Diminished ovarian function occurs early and is a primary cause for age-related decline in female fertility; however, its underlying mechanism remains unclear. This study investigated the roles that genome and epigenome structure play in age-related changes in gene expression and ovarian function, using human ovarian granulosa cells as an experimental system. DNA methylomes were compared between two groups of women with distinct age-related differences in ovarian functions, using both Methylated DNA Capture followed by Next Generation Sequencing (MethylCap-seq) and Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS); their transcriptomes were investigated using mRNA-seq. Significant, non-random changes in transcriptome and DNA methylome features are observed in human ovarian granulosa cells as women age and their ovarian functions deteriorate. The strongest correlations between methylation and the age-related changes in gene expression are not confined to the promoter region; rather, high densities of hypomethylated CpG-rich regions spanning the gene body are preferentially associated with gene down-regulation. This association is further enhanced where CpG regions are localized near the 3'-end of the gene. Such features characterize several genes crucial in age-related decline in ovarian function, most notably the AMH (Anti-Müllerian Hormone) gene. The genome-wide correlation between the density of hypomethylated intragenic and 3'-end regions and gene expression suggests previously unexplored mechanisms linking epigenome structure to age-related physiology and pathology.
24738887	3	2014	Stem Cells Dev	Stable methylation at promoters distinguishes epiblast stem cells from embryonic stem cells and the in vivo epiblasts.	Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) and Epiblast Stem Cells (EpiSCs) are the in vitro representatives of naïve and primed pluripotency, respectively. It is currently unclear how their epigenomes underpin the phenotypic and molecular characteristics of these distinct pluripotent states. Here, we performed a genome-wide comparison of DNA methylation between ESCs and EpiSCs by MethylCap-Seq. We observe that promoters are preferential targets for methylation in EpiSC compared to ESCs, in particular high CpG island promoters. This is in line with upregulation of the de novo methyltransferases Dnmt3a1 and Dnmt3b in EpiSC, and downregulation of the demethylases Tet1 and Tet2. Remarkably, the observed DNA methylation signature is specific to EpiSCs and differs from that of their in vivo counterpart, the postimplantation epiblast. Using a subset of promoters that are differentially methylated, we show that DNA methylation is established within a few days during in vitro outgrowth of the epiblast, and also occurs when ESCs are converted to EpiSCs in vitro. Once established, this methylation is stable, as ES-like cells obtained by in vitro reversion of EpiSCs display an epigenetic memory that only extensive passaging and sub-cloning are able to almost completely erase.
25276247	1	2014	Clin Epigenetics	High-frequency aberrantly methylated targets in pancreatic adenocarcinoma identified via global DNA methylation analysis using methylCap-seq.	BACKGROUND: Extensive reprogramming and dysregulation of DNA methylation is an important characteristic of pancreatic cancer (PC). Our study aimed to characterize the genomic methylation patterns in various genomic contexts of PC. The methyl capture sequencing (methylCap-seq) method was used to map differently methylated regions (DMRs) in pooled samples from ten PC tissues and ten adjacent non-tumor (PN) tissues. A selection of DMRs was validated in an independent set of PC and PN samples using methylation-specific PCR (MSP), bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP), and methylation sensitive restriction enzyme-based qPCR (MSRE-qPCR). The mRNA and expressed sequence tag (EST) expression of the corresponding genes was investigated using RT-qPCR.RESULTS: A total of 1,131 PC-specific and 727 PN-specific hypermethylated DMRs were identified in association with CpG islands (CGIs), including gene-associated CGIs and orphan CGIs; 2,955 PC-specific and 2,386 PN-specific hypermethylated DMRs were associated with gene promoters, including promoters containing or lacking CGIs. Moreover, 1,744 PC-specific and 1,488 PN-specific hypermethylated DMRs were found to be associated with CGIs or CGI shores. These results suggested that aberrant hypermethylation in PC typically occurs in regions surrounding the transcription start site (TSS). The BSP, MSP, MSRE-qPCR, and RT-qPCR data indicated that the aberrant DNA methylation in PC tissue and in PC cell lines was associated with gene (or corresponding EST) expression.CONCLUSIONS: Our study characterized the genome-wide DNA methylation patterns in PC and identified DMRs that were distributed among various genomic contexts that might influence the expression of corresponding genes or transcripts to promote PC. These DMRs might serve as diagnostic biomarkers or therapeutic targets for PC.
25237057	0	2014	Nucleic Acids Res	SNP-guided identification of monoallelic DNA-methylation events from enrichment-based sequencing data.	Monoallelic gene expression is typically initiated early in the development of an organism. Dysregulation of monoallelic gene expression has already been linked to several non-Mendelian inherited genetic disorders. In humans, DNA-methylation is deemed to be an important regulator of monoallelic gene expression, but only few examples are known. One important reason is that current, cost-affordable truly genome-wide methods to assess DNA-methylation are based on sequencing post-enrichment. Here, we present a new methodology based on classical population genetic theory, i.e. the Hardy-Weinberg theorem, that combines methylomic data from MethylCap-seq with associated SNP profiles to identify monoallelically methylated loci. Applied on 334 MethylCap-seq samples of very diverse origin, this resulted in the identification of 80 genomic regions featured by monoallelic DNA-methylation. Of these 80 loci, 49 are located in genic regions of which 25 have already been linked to imprinting. Further analysis revealed statistically significant enrichment of these loci in promoter regions, further establishing the relevance and usefulness of the method. Additional validation was done using both 14 whole-genome bisulfite sequencing data sets and 16 mRNA-seq data sets. Importantly, the developed approach can be easily applied to other enrichment-based sequencing technologies, like the ChIP-seq-based identification of monoallelic histone modifications.
25178460	0	2014	Bioinformatics	PrEMeR-CG: inferring nucleotide level DNA methylation values from MethylCap-seq data.	MOTIVATION: DNA methylation is an epigenetic change occurring in genomic CpG sequences that contribute to the regulation of gene transcription both in normal and malignant cells. Next-generation sequencing has been used to characterize DNA methylation status at the genome scale, but suffers from high sequencing cost in the case of whole-genome bisulfite sequencing, or from reduced resolution (inability to precisely define which of the CpGs are methylated) with capture-based techniques.RESULTS: Here we present a computational method that computes nucleotide-resolution methylation values from capture-based data by incorporating fragment length profiles into a model of methylation analysis. We demonstrate that it compares favorably with nucleotide-resolution bisulfite sequencing and has better predictive power with respect to a reference than window-based methods, often used for enrichment data. The described method was used to produce the methylation data used in tandem with gene expression to produce a novel and clinically significant gene signature in acute myeloid leukemia. In addition, we introduce a complementary statistical method that uses this nucleotide-resolution methylation data for detection of differentially methylated features.
25859288	0	2014	Clin Epigenetics	Genome-wide methylation profiling of the different stages of hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma development in plasma cell-free DNA reveals potential biomarkers for early detection and high-risk monitoring of hepatocellular carcinoma.	BACKGROUND: An important model of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) that has been described in southeast Asia includes the transition from chronic hepatitis B infection (CHB) to liver cirrhosis (LC) and, finally, to HCC. The genome-wide methylation profiling of plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has not previously been used to assess HCC development. Using MethylCap-seq, we analyzed the genome-wide cfDNA methylation profiles by separately pooling healthy control (HC), CHB, LC and HCC samples and independently validating the library data for the tissue DNA and cfDNA by MSP, qMSP and Multiplex-BSP-seq.RESULTS: The dynamic features of cfDNA methylation coincided with the natural course of HCC development. Data mining revealed the presence of 240, 272 and 286 differentially methylated genes (DMGs) corresponding to the early, middle and late stages of HCC progression, respectively. The validation of the DNA and cfDNA results in independent tissues identified three DMGs, including ZNF300, SLC22A20 and SHISA7, with the potential for distinguishing between CHB and LC as well as between LC and HCC. The area under the curve (AUC) ranged from 0.65 to 0.80, and the odds ratio (OR) values ranged from 5.18 to 14.2.CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed highly dynamic cfDNA methylation profiles in support of HBV-related HCC development. We have identified a panel of DMGs that are predictive for the early, middle and late stages of HCC development, and these are potential markers for the early detection of HCC as well as the screening of high-risk populations.
23922811	6	2013	PLoS One	Differential programming of B cells in AID deficient mice.	The Aicda locus encodes the activation induced cytidine deaminase (AID) and is highly expressed in germinal center (GC) B cells to initiate somatic hypermutation (SHM) and class switch recombination (CSR) of immunoglobulin (Ig) genes. Besides these Ig specific activities in B cells, AID has been implicated in active DNA demethylation in non-B cell systems. We here determined a potential role of AID as an epigenetic eraser and transcriptional regulator in B cells. RNA-Seq on different B cell subsets revealed that Aicda(-/-) B cells are developmentally affected. However as shown by RNA-Seq, MethylCap-Seq, and SNP analysis these transcriptome alterations may not relate to AID, but alternatively to a CBA mouse strain derived region around the targeted Aicda locus. These unexpected confounding parameters provide alternative, AID-independent interpretations on genotype-phenotype correlations previously reported in numerous studies on AID using the Aicda(-/-) mouse strain.
24130073	5	2013	Clin Cancer Res	The effect of VEGF-targeted therapy on biomarker expression in sequential tissue from patients with metastatic clear cell renal cancer.	PURPOSE: To investigate how biologically relevant markers change in response to antiangiogenic therapy in metastatic clear cell renal cancer (mRCC) and correlate these changes with outcome.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The study used sequential tumor tissue and functional imaging (taken at baseline and 12-16 weeks) obtained from three similar phase II studies. All three studies investigated the role of VEGF tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) before planned nephrectomy in untreated mRCC (n = 85). The effect of targeted therapy on ten biomarkers was measured from sequential tissue. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array and DNA methylation profiling (MethylCap-seq) was performed in matched frozen pairs. Biomarker expression was correlated with early progression (progression as best response) and delayed progression (between 12-16 weeks).RESULTS: VEGF TKI treatment caused a significant reduction in vessel density (CD31), phospho-S6K expression, PDL-1 expression, and FOXP3 expression (P &lt; 0.05 for each). It also caused a significant increase in cytoplasmic FGF-2, MET receptor expression in vessels, Fuhrman tumor grade, and Ki-67 (P &lt; 0.05 for each). Higher levels of Ki-67 and CD31 were associated with delayed progression (P &lt; 0.05). Multiple samples (n = 5) from the same tumor showed marked heterogeneity of tumor grade, which increased significantly with treatment. Array CGH showed extensive intrapatient variability, which did not occur in DNA methylation analysis.CONCLUSION: TKI treatment is associated with dynamic changes in relevant biomarkers, despite significant heterogeneity in chromosomal and protein, but not epigenetic expression. Changes to Ki-67 expression and tumor grade indicate that treatment is associated with an increase in the aggressive phenotype of the tumor.
23624103	3	2013	Methods	The developmental epigenomics toolbox: ChIP-seq and MethylCap-seq profiling of early zebrafish embryos.	Genome-wide profiling of DNA methylation and histone modifications answered many questions as to how the genes are regulated on a global scale and what their epigenetic makeup is. Yet, little is known about the function of these marks during early vertebrate embryogenesis. Here we provide detailed protocols for ChIP-seq and MethylCap-seq procedures applied to zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryonic material at four developmental stages. As a proof of principle, we have profiled on a global scale a number of post-translational histone modifications including H3K4me1, H3K4me3 and H3K27ac. We demonstrate that these marks are dynamic during early development and that such developmental transitions can be detected by ChIP-seq. In addition, we applied MethylCap-seq to show that developmentally-regulated DNA methylation remodeling can be detected by such a procedure. Our MethylCap-seq data concur with previous DNA methylation studies of early zebrafish development rendering this method highly suitable for the global assessment of DNA methylation in early vertebrate embryos.
23281662	3	2013	BMC Genomics	Enrichment-based DNA methylation analysis using next-generation sequencing: sample exclusion, estimating changes in global methylation, and the contribution of replicate lanes.	BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is an important epigenetic mark and dysregulation of DNA methylation is associated with many diseases including cancer. Advances in next-generation sequencing now allow unbiased methylome profiling of entire patient cohorts, greatly facilitating biomarker discovery and presenting new opportunities to understand the biological mechanisms by which changes in methylation contribute to disease. Enrichment-based sequencing assays such as MethylCap-seq are a cost effective solution for genome-wide determination of methylation status, but the technical reliability of methylation reconstruction from raw sequencing data has not been well characterized.METHODS: We analyze three MethylCap-seq data sets and perform two different analyses to assess data quality. First, we investigate how data quality is affected by excluding samples that do not meet quality control cutoff requirements. Second, we consider the effect of additional reads on enrichment score, saturation, and coverage. Lastly, we verify a method for the determination of the global amount of methylation from MethylCap-seq data by comparing to a spiked-in control DNA of known methylation status.RESULTS: We show that rejection of samples based on our quality control parameters leads to a significant improvement of methylation calling. Additional reads beyond ~13 million unique aligned reads improved coverage, modestly improved saturation, and did not impact enrichment score. Lastly, we find that a global methylation indicator calculated from MethylCap-seq data correlates well with the global methylation level of a sample as obtained from a spike-in DNA of known methylation level.CONCLUSIONS: We show that with appropriate quality control MethylCap-seq is a reliable tool, suitable for cohorts of hundreds of patients, that provides reproducible methylation information on a feature by feature basis as well as information about the global level of methylation.
22726460	13	2012	Epigenetics Chromatin	Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of non-small cell lung carcinomas.	BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) is a complex malignancy that owing to its heterogeneity and poor prognosis poses many challenges to diagnosis, prognosis and patient treatment. DNA methylation is an important mechanism of epigenetic regulation involved in normal development and cancer. It is a very stable and specific modification and therefore in principle a very suitable marker for epigenetic phenotyping of tumors. Here we present a genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of NSCLC samples and paired lung tissues, where we combine MethylCap and next generation sequencing (MethylCap-seq) to provide comprehensive DNA methylation maps of the tumor and paired lung samples. The MethylCap-seq data were validated by bisulfite sequencing and methyl-specific polymerase chain reaction of selected regions.RESULTS: Analysis of the MethylCap-seq data revealed a strong positive correlation between replicate experiments and between paired tumor/lung samples. We identified 57 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) present in all NSCLC tumors analyzed by MethylCap-seq. While hypomethylated DMRs did not correlate to any particular functional category of genes, the hypermethylated DMRs were strongly associated with genes encoding transcriptional regulators. Furthermore, subtelomeric regions and satellite repeats were hypomethylated in the NSCLC samples. We also identified DMRs that were specific to two of the major subtypes of NSCLC, adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas.CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, we provide a resource containing genome-wide DNA methylation maps of NSCLC and their paired lung tissues, and comprehensive lists of known and novel DMRs and associated genes in NSCLC.
22216282	13	2012	PLoS One	Global analysis of DNA methylation by Methyl-Capture sequencing reveals epigenetic control of cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer cell.	Cisplatin resistance is one of the major reasons leading to the high death rate of ovarian cancer. Methyl-Capture sequencing (MethylCap-seq), which combines precipitation of methylated DNA by recombinant methyl-CpG binding domain of MBD2 protein with NGS, global and unbiased analysis of global DNA methylation patterns. We applied MethylCap-seq to analyze genome-wide DNA methylation profile of cisplatin sensitive ovarian cancer cell line A2780 and its isogenic derivative resistant line A2780CP. We obtained 21,763,035 raw reads for the drug resistant cell line A2780CP and 18,821,061reads for the sensitive cell line A2780. We identified 1224 hyper-methylated and 1216 hypomethylated DMRs (differentially methylated region) in A2780CP compared to A2780. Our MethylCap-seq data on this ovarian cancer cisplatin resistant model provided a good resource for the research community. We also found that A2780CP, compared to A2780, has lower observed to expected methylated CpG ratios, suggesting a lower global CpG methylation in A2780CP cells. Methylation specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing confirmed hypermethylation of PTK6, PRKCE and BCL2L1 in A2780 compared with A2780CP. Furthermore, treatment with the demethylation reagent 5-aza-dC in A2780 cells demethylated the promoters and restored the expression of PTK6, PRKCE and BCL2L1.
23079744	10	2012	Epigenetics	Comparative genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of colorectal tumor and matched normal tissues.	Aberrant DNA methylation often occurs in colorectal cancer (CRC). In our study we applied a genome-wide DNA methylation analysis approach, MethylCap-seq, to map the differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in 24 tumors and matched normal colon samples. In total, 2687 frequently hypermethylated and 468 frequently hypomethylated regions were identified, which include potential biomarkers for CRC diagnosis. Hypermethylation in the tumor samples was enriched at CpG islands and gene promoters, while hypomethylation was distributed throughout the genome. Using epigenetic data from human embryonic stem cells, we show that frequently hypermethylated regions coincide with bivalent loci in human embryonic stem cells. DNA methylation is commonly thought to lead to gene silencing; however, integration of publically available gene expression data indicates that 75% of the frequently hypermethylated genes were most likely already lowly or not expressed in normal tissue. Collectively, our study provides genome-wide DNA methylation maps of CRC, comprehensive lists of DMRs, and gives insights into the role of aberrant DNA methylation in CRC formation.
22529986	8	2012	PLoS One	Methylcap-seq reveals novel DNA methylation markers for the diagnosis and recurrence prediction of bladder cancer in a Chinese population.	PURPOSE: There is a need to supplement or supplant the conventional diagnostic tools, namely, cystoscopy and B-type ultrasound, for bladder cancer (BC). We aimed to identify novel DNA methylation markers for BC through genome-wide profiling of BC cell lines and subsequent methylation-specific PCR (MSP) screening of clinical urine samples.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The methyl-DNA binding domain (MBD) capture technique, methylCap/seq, was performed to screen for specific hypermethylated CpG islands in two BC cell lines (5637 and T24). The top one hundred hypermethylated targets were sequentially screened by MSP in urine samples to gradually narrow the target number and optimize the composition of the diagnostic panel. The diagnostic performance of the obtained panel was evaluated in different clinical scenarios.RESULTS: A total of 1,627 hypermethylated promoter targets in the BC cell lines was identified by Illumina sequencing. The top 104 hypermethylated targets were reduced to eight genes (VAX1, KCNV1, ECEL1, TMEM26, TAL1, PROX1, SLC6A20, and LMX1A) after the urine DNA screening in a small sample size of 8 normal control and 18 BC subjects. Validation in an independent sample of 212 BC patients enabled the optimization of five methylation targets, including VAX1, KCNV1, TAL1, PPOX1, and CFTR, which was obtained in our previous study, for BC diagnosis with a sensitivity and specificity of 88.68% and 87.25%, respectively. In addition, the methylation of VAX1 and LMX1A was found to be associated with BC recurrence.CONCLUSIONS: We identified a promising diagnostic marker panel for early non-invasive detection and subsequent BC surveillance.
23134780	3	2012	BMC Genomics	Methods for high-throughput MethylCap-Seq data analysis.	BACKGROUND: Advances in whole genome profiling have revolutionized the cancer research field, but at the same time have raised new bioinformatics challenges. For next generation sequencing (NGS), these include data storage, computational costs, sequence processing and alignment, delineating appropriate statistical measures, and data visualization. Currently there is a lack of workflows for efficient analysis of large, MethylCap-seq datasets containing multiple sample groups.METHODS: The NGS application MethylCap-seq involves the in vitro capture of methylated DNA and subsequent analysis of enriched fragments by massively parallel sequencing. The workflow we describe performs MethylCap-seq experimental Quality Control (QC), sequence file processing and alignment, differential methylation analysis of multiple biological groups, hierarchical clustering, assessment of genome-wide methylation patterns, and preparation of files for data visualization.RESULTS: Here, we present a scalable, flexible workflow for MethylCap-seq QC, secondary data analysis, tertiary analysis of multiple experimental groups, and data visualization. We demonstrate the experimental QC procedure with results from a large ovarian cancer study dataset and propose parameters which can identify problematic experiments. Promoter methylation profiling and hierarchical clustering analyses are demonstrated for four groups of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. We propose a Global Methylation Indicator (GMI) function to assess genome-wide changes in methylation patterns between experimental groups. We also show how the workflow facilitates data visualization in a web browser with the application Anno-J.CONCLUSIONS: This workflow and its suite of features will assist biologists in conducting methylation profiling projects and facilitate meaningful biological interpretation.
22484542	3	2011	IEEE Int Workshop Genomic Signal Process Stat	A Scalable, Flexible Workflow for MethylCap-Seq Data Analysis.	Advances in whole genome profiling have revolutionized the cancer research field, but at the same time have raised new bioinformatics challenges. For next generation sequencing (NGS), these include data storage, computational costs, sequence processing and alignment, delineating appropriate statistical measures, and data visualization. The NGS application MethylCap-seq involves the in vitro capture of methylated DNA and subsequent analysis of enriched fragments by massively parallel sequencing. Here, we present a scalable, flexible workflow for MethylCap-seq Quality Control, secondary data analysis, tertiary analysis of multiple experimental groups, and data visualization. This workflow and its suite of features will assist biologists in conducting methylation profiling projects and facilitate meaningful biological interpretation.
20852634	154	2010	Nat Biotechnol	Quantitative comparison of genome-wide DNA methylation mapping technologies.	DNA methylation plays a key role in regulating eukaryotic gene expression. Although mitotically heritable and stable over time, patterns of DNA methylation frequently change in response to cell differentiation, disease and environmental influences. Several methods have been developed to map DNA methylation on a genomic scale. Here, we benchmark four of these approaches by analyzing two human embryonic stem cell lines derived from genetically unrelated embryos and a matched pair of colon tumor and adjacent normal colon tissue obtained from the same donor. Our analysis reveals that methylated DNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeDIP-seq), methylated DNA capture by affinity purification (MethylCap-seq), reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) and the Infinium HumanMethylation27 assay all produce accurate DNA methylation data. However, these methods differ in their ability to detect differentially methylated regions between pairs of samples. We highlight strengths and weaknesses of the four methods and give practical recommendations for the design of epigenomic case-control studies.
20542119	55	2010	Methods	Whole-genome DNA methylation profiling using MethylCap-seq.	MethylCap-seq is a robust procedure for genome-wide profiling of DNA methylation. The approach consists of the capture of methylated DNA using the MBD domain of MeCP2, and subsequent next-generation sequencing of eluted DNA. Elution of the captured methylated DNA is done in steps using a salt gradient, which stratifies the genome into fractions with different CpG density. The enrichment reached within the individual eluates allows for cost-effective deep sequence coverage. The profiles together yield a detailed genome-wide map of methylated regions and readily allows detection of DNA methylation in known and novel regions. Here, we describe principles and details of the MethylCap-seq procedure using different sources of starting material.
