PMID	Citations	YearPubmed	Journal	Title	Abstract
26134912	0	2015	Cold Spring Harb Protoc	Measuring Chromatin Structure in Budding Yeast.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) has revolutionized the ways in which the conformation of chromatin and its relationship to other molecular functions can be studied. 3C-based techniques are used to determine the spatial arrangement of chromosomes in organisms ranging from bacteria to humans. In particular, they can be applied to the study of chromosome folding and organization in model organisms with small genomes and for which powerful genetic tools exist, such as budding yeast. Studies in yeast allow the mechanisms that establish or maintain chromatin structure to be analyzed at very high resolution with relatively low cost, and further our understanding of these fundamental processes in higher eukaryotes as well. Here we provide an overview of chromatin structure and introduce methods for performing 3C, with a focus on studies in budding yeast. Variations of the basic 3C approach (e.g., 3C-PCR, 5C, and Hi-C) can be used according to the scope and goals of a given experiment.
26059817	0	2015	J Cell Physiol	C-ing the Genome: A Compendium of Chromosome Conformation Capture Methods to Study Higher-Order Chromatin Organization.	Three-dimensional organization of the chromatin has important roles in transcription, replication, DNA repair, and pathologic events such as translocations. There are two fundamental ways to study higher-order chromatin organization: microscopic and molecular approaches. In this review, we briefly introduce the molecular approaches, focusing on chromosome conformation capture or&quot;3C&quot; technology and its derivatives, which can be used to probe chromatin folding at resolutions beyond that provided by microscopy techniques. We further discuss the different types of data generated by the 3C-based methods and how they can be used to answer distinct biological questions. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
26043745	0	2015	Ann Bot	Flow sorting of C-genome chromosomes from wild relatives of wheat Aegilops markgrafii, Ae. triuncialis and Ae. cylindrica, and their molecular organization.	BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Aegilops markgrafii (CC) and its natural hybrids Ae. triuncialis (U(t)U(t)C(t)C(t)) and Ae. cylindrica (D(c)D(c)C(c)C(c)) represent a rich reservoir of useful genes for improvement of bread wheat (Triticum aestivum), but the limited information available on their genome structure and the shortage of molecular (cyto-) genetic tools hamper the utilization of the extant genetic diversity. This study provides the complete karyotypes in the three species obtained after fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with repetitive DNA probes, and evaluates the potential of flow cytometric chromosome sorting.METHODS: The flow karyotypes obtained after the analysis of 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-stained chromosomes were characterized and the chromosome content of the peaks on the flow karyotypes was determined by FISH. Twenty-nine conserved orthologous set (COS) markers covering all seven wheat homoeologous chromosome groups were used for PCR with DNA amplified from flow-sorted chromosomes and genomic DNA.KEY RESULTS: FISH with repetitive DNA probes revealed that chromosomes 4C, 5C, 7C(t), T6U(t)S.6U(t)L-5C(t)L, 1C(c) and 5D(c) could be sorted with purities ranging from 66 to 91 %, while the remaining chromosomes could be sorted in groups of 2-5. This identified a partial wheat-C-genome homology for group 4 and 5 chromosomes. In addition, 1C chromosomes were homologous with group 1 of wheat; a small segment from group 2 indicated 1C-2C rearrangement. An extensively rearranged structure of chromosome 7C relative to wheat was also detected.CONCLUSIONS: The possibility of purifying Aegilops chromosomes provides an attractive opportunity to investigate the structure and evolution of the Aegilops C genome and to develop molecular tools to facilitate the identification of alien chromatin and support alien introgression breeding in bread wheat.
26034306	0	2015	Cold Spring Harb Protoc	Chromosome Conformation Capture Carbon Copy (5C) in Budding Yeast.	Chromosome conformation capture carbon copy (5C) is a high-throughput method for detecting ligation products of interest in a chromosome conformation capture (3C) library. 5C uses ligation-mediated amplification (LMA) to generate carbon copies of 3C ligation product junctions using single-stranded oligonucleotide probes. This procedure produces a 5C library of short DNA molecules which represent the interactions between the corresponding restriction fragments. The 5C library can be amplified using universal primers containing the Illumina paired-end adaptor sequences for subsequent high-throughput sequencing.
26034305	0	2015	Cold Spring Harb Protoc	Randomized ligation control for chromosome conformation capture.	In experiments using chromosome conformation capture followed by PCR (3C-PCR) or chromosome conformation capture carbon copy (5C), it is critical to control for intrinsic biases in the restriction fragments of interest and the probes or primers used for detection. Characteristics such as GC%, annealing temperature, efficiency of 3C primers or 5C probes, and length of restriction fragment can cause variations in primer or probe performance and fragment ligation efficiency. Bias can be measured empirically by production of a random control library, as described here, to be used with the 3C library of interest.
25831887	0	2015	Mol Biol (Mosk)	[Spatial organization of interphase chromosomes and the role of chromatin fiber dynamycs in the positioning of genome elements].	Many studies are devoted to the analysis ofinterphase chromosome architecture due to the evidence of functional-dependent spatial organization of the genome. These studies are based on classical cytological methods as well as on biochemical approaches (3C, 4C, 5C, Hi-C) allowing for the detection of long-range interactions between fragments of chromatin fibers, including the genome-wide interactions. In this review, we discuss the results of these researches which make it possible to explain functional-dependent multilevel compartmentalization of the nucleous and unravel the principals of high-level chromatin organization. Special attention is paid to the enchancer-promoter interactions important for the regulation of gene expression. Accordingly, we consider the model of an active chromatin hub and the alternative model of an active chromatin compartment, which was proposed based on reconsideration of some steps of the 3C procedure.
25512564	2	2014	Genes Dev	Spatial genome organization: contrasting views from chromosome conformation capture and fluorescence in situ hybridization.	Although important for gene regulation, most studies of genome organization use either fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or chromosome conformation capture (3C) methods. FISH directly visualizes the spatial relationship of sequences but is usually applied to a few loci at a time. The frequency at which sequences are ligated together by formaldehyde cross-linking can be measured genome-wide by 3C methods, with higher frequencies thought to reflect shorter distances. FISH and 3C should therefore give the same views of genome organization, but this has not been tested extensively. We investigated the murine HoxD locus with 3C carbon copy (5C) and FISH in different developmental and activity states and in the presence or absence of epigenetic regulators. We identified situations in which the two data sets are concordant but found other conditions under which chromatin topographies extrapolated from 5C or FISH data are not compatible. We suggest that products captured by 3C do not always reflect spatial proximity, with ligation occurring between sequences located hundreds of nanometers apart, influenced by nuclear environment and chromatin composition. We conclude that results obtained at high resolution with either 3C methods or FISH alone must be interpreted with caution and that views about genome organization should be validated by independent methods.
24571491	1	2014	J Integr Plant Biol	Identification and fine mapping of quantitative trait loci for seed vigor in germination and seedling establishment in rice.	Seed vigor is an index of seed quality that is used to describe the rapid and uniform germination and the establishment of strong seedlings in any environmental conditions. Strong seed vigor in low-temperature germination conditions is particularly important in direct-sowing rice production systems. However, seed vigor has not been selected as an important breeding trait in traditional breeding programs due to its quantitative inherence. In this study, we identified and mapped eight quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for seed vigor by using a recombinant inbred population from a cross between rice (Oryza sativa L. ssp. indica) cultivars ZS97 and MH63. Conditional QTL analysis identified qSV-1, qSV-5b, qSV-6a, qSV-6b, and qSV-11 influenced seedling establishment and that qSV-5a, qSV-5c, and qSV-8 influenced only germination. Of these, qSV-1, qSV-5b, qSV-6a, qSV-6b, and qSV-8 were low-temperature-specific QTLs. Two major-effective QTLs, qSV-1, and qSV-5c were narrowed down to 1.13-Mbp and 400-kbp genomic regions, respectively. The results provide tightly linked DNA markers for the marker-assistant pyramiding of multiple positive alleles for increased seed vigor in both normal and low-temperature germination environments.
25151170	0	2014	Methods Mol Biol	DamID as an approach to studying long-distance chromatin interactions.	How transcription is controlled by distally located cis-regulatory elements is an active area of research in biology. As such, there have been many techniques developed to probe these long-distance chromatin interactions. Here, we focus on one such method, called DamID (van Steensel and Henikoff, Nat Biotechnol 18(4):424-428, 2000). While other methods like 3C (Dekker et al., Science 295(5558):1306-1311, 2002), 4C (Simonis et al., Nat Genet 38(11):1348-1354, 2006; Zhao et al., Nat Genet 38(11):1341-1347, 2006), and 5C (Dostie et al., Genome Res 16(10):1299-1309, 2006) are undoubtedly powerful, the DamID method can offer some advantages over these methods if the genetic locus can be easily modified. The lack of tissue fixation, the low amounts of starting material required to perform the experiment, and the relatively modest hardware requirements make DamID experiments an interesting alternative to consider when examining long-distance chromatin interactions.
24995990	0	2014	Genome Biol	Classifying leukemia types with chromatin conformation data.	BACKGROUND: Although genetic or epigenetic alterations have been shown to affect the three-dimensional organization of genomes, the utility of chromatin conformation in the classification of human disease has never been addressed.RESULTS: Here, we explore whether chromatin conformation can be used to classify human leukemia. We map the conformation of the HOXA gene cluster in a panel of cell lines with 5C chromosome conformation capture technology, and use the data to train and test a support vector machine classifier named 3D-SP. We show that 3D-SP is able to accurately distinguish leukemias expressing MLL-fusion proteins from those expressing only wild-type MLL, and that it can also classify leukemia subtypes according to MLL fusion partner, based solely on 5C data.CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides the first proof-of-principle demonstration that chromatin conformation contains the information value necessary for classification of leukemia subtypes.
23657480	70	2013	Nat Rev Genet	Exploring the three-dimensional organization of genomes: interpreting chromatin interaction data.	How DNA is organized in three dimensions inside the cell nucleus and how this affects the ways in which cells access, read and interpret genetic information are among the longest standing questions in cell biology. Using newly developed molecular, genomic and computational approaches based on the chromosome conformation capture technology (such as 3C, 4C, 5C and Hi-C), the spatial organization of genomes is being explored at unprecedented resolution. Interpreting the increasingly large chromatin interaction data sets is now posing novel challenges. Here we describe several types of statistical and computational approaches that have recently been developed to analyse chromatin interaction data.
24200812	44	2013	Science	Organization of the mitotic chromosome.	Mitotic chromosomes are among the most recognizable structures in the cell, yet for over a century their internal organization remains largely unsolved. We applied chromosome conformation capture methods, 5C and Hi-C, across the cell cycle and revealed two distinct three-dimensional folding states of the human genome. We show that the highly compartmentalized and cell type-specific organization described previously for nonsynchronous cells is restricted to interphase. In metaphase, we identified a homogenous folding state that is locus-independent, common to all chromosomes, and consistent among cell types, suggesting a general principle of metaphase chromosome organization. Using polymer simulations, we found that metaphase Hi-C data are inconsistent with classic hierarchical models and are instead best described by a linearly organized longitudinally compressed array of consecutive chromatin loops.
23411633	17	2013	Nat Protoc	Multiplexed chromosome conformation capture sequencing for rapid genome-scale high-resolution detection of long-range chromatin interactions.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology is a powerful and increasingly popular tool for analyzing the spatial organization of genomes. Several 3C variants have been developed (e.g., 4C, 5C, ChIA-PET, Hi-C), allowing large-scale mapping of long-range genomic interactions. Here we describe multiplexed 3C sequencing (3C-seq), a 4C variant coupled to next-generation sequencing, allowing genome-scale detection of long-range interactions with candidate regions. Compared with several other available techniques, 3C-seq offers a superior resolution (typically single restriction fragment resolution; approximately 1-8 kb on average) and can be applied in a semi-high-throughput fashion. It allows the assessment of long-range interactions of up to 192 genes or regions of interest in parallel by multiplexing library sequencing. This renders multiplexed 3C-seq an inexpensive, quick (total hands-on time of 2 weeks) and efficient method that is ideal for the in-depth analysis of complex genetic loci. The preparation of multiplexed 3C-seq libraries can be performed by any investigator with basic skills in molecular biology techniques. Data analysis requires basic expertise in bioinformatics and in Linux and Python environments. The protocol describes all materials, critical steps and bioinformatics tools required for successful application of 3C-seq technology.
24183790	10	2013	Biol Psychiatry	Methamphetamine-associated memory is regulated by a writer and an eraser of permissive histone methylation.	BACKGROUND: Memories associated with drugs of abuse, such as methamphetamine (METH), increase relapse vulnerability to substance use disorder by triggering craving. The nucleus accumbens (NAc) is essential to these drug-associated memories, but underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Posttranslational chromatin modifications, such as histone methylation, modulate gene transcription; thus, we investigated the role of the associated epigenetic modifiers in METH-associated memory.METHODS: Conditioned place preference was used to assess the epigenetic landscape in the NAc supporting METH-associated memory (n = 79). The impact of histone methylation (H3K4me2/3) on the formation and expression of METH-associated memory was determined by focal, intra-NAc knockdown (KD) of a writer, the methyltransferase mixed-lineage leukemia 1 (Mll1) (n = 26), and an eraser, the histone lysine (K)-specific demethylase 5C (Kdm5c) (n = 38), of H3K4me2/3.RESULTS: A survey of chromatin modifications in the NAc of animals forming a METH-associated memory revealed the global induction of several modifications associated with active transcription. This correlated with a pattern of gene activation, as revealed by microarray analysis, including upregulation of oxytocin receptor (Oxtr) and FBJ osteosarcoma oncogene (Fos), the promoters of which also had increased H3K4me3. KD of Mll1 reduced H3K4me3, Fos and Oxtr levels and disrupted METH-associated memory. KD of Kdm5c resulted in hypermethylation of H3K4 and prevented the expression of METH-associated memory.CONCLUSIONS: The development and expression of METH-associated memory are supported by regulation of H3K4me2/3 levels by MLL1 and KDM5C, respectively, in the NAc. These data indicate that permissive histone methylation, and the associated epigenetic writers and erasers, represent potential targets for the treatment of substance abuse relapse, a psychiatric condition perpetuated by unwanted associative memories.
24014450	3	2013	Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol	Chromatin looping and organization at developmentally regulated gene loci.	Developmentally regulated genes are often controlled by distant enhancers, silencers and insulators, to implement their correct transcriptional programs. In recent years, the development of 3C and derived techniques (4C, 5C, HiC, ChIA-PET, etc.) has confirmed that chromatin looping is an important mechanism for the transfer of regulatory information in mammalian cells. At many developmentally regulated gene loci, transcriptional activation is indeed accompanied by the formation of chromatin loops between genes and distant enhancers. Similarly, dynamic looping between insulator elements and changes in local 3D organization may be observed upon variation in transcriptional activity. Chromatin looping also occurs at silent gene loci, where its function remains less understood. In lineage-committed cells, partial 3D configurations are detected at loci that are activated at later stages. However, these partial configurations usually lack promoter-enhancer loops that accompany transcriptional activation, suggesting they have structural functions. Definitive evidence for a repressive role of chromatin looping is still lacking. Chromatin loops have been reported at repressed loci but, alternatively, they may act as a distraction for active loops. Together, these mechanisms allow fine-tuning of regulatory programs, thus providing further diversity in the transcriptional control of developmentally regulated gene loci.
23959525	1	2013	Theor Appl Genet	Linkage mapping and identification of QTL affecting deoxynivalenol (DON) content (Fusarium resistance) in oats (Avena sativa L.).	Mycotoxins caused by Fusarium spp. is a major concern on food and feed safety in oats, although Fusarium head blight (FHB) is often less apparent than in other small grain cereals. Breeding resistant cultivars is an economic and environment-friendly way to reduce toxin content, either by the identification of resistance QTL or phenotypic evaluation. Both are little explored in oats. A recombinant-inbred line population, Hurdal × Z595-7 (HZ595, with 184 lines), was used for QTL mapping and was phenotyped for 3 years. Spawn inoculation was applied and deoxynivalenol (DON) content, FHB severity, days to heading and maturity (DH and DM), and plant height (PH) were measured. The population was genotyped with DArTs, AFLPs, SSRs and selected SNPs, and a linkage map of 1,132 cM was constructed, covering all 21 oat chromosomes. A QTL for DON on chromosome 17A/7C, tentatively designated as Qdon.umb-17A/7C, was detected in all experiments using composite interval mapping, with phenotypic effects of 12.2–26.6 %. In addition, QTL for DON were also found on chromosomes 5C, 9D, 13A, 14D and unknown_3, while a QTL for FHB was found on 11A. Several of the DON/FHB QTL coincided with those for DH, DM and/or PH. A half-sib population of HZ595, Hurdal × Z615-4 (HZ615, with 91 lines), was phenotyped in 2011 for validation of QTL found in HZ595, and Qdon.umb-17A/7C was again localized with a phenotypic effect of 12.4 %. Three SNPs closely linked to Qdon.umb-17A/7C were identified in both populations, and one each for QTL on 5C, 11A and 13A were identified in HZ595. These SNPs, together with those yet to be identified, could be useful in marker-assisted selection to pyramiding resistance QTL.
23662421	0	2013	Genetika	[Organization of eukaryotic chromosomes: from Kol'tsov's studies up to present day].	N. K. Kol'tsov ideas and views on the organization of eukaryotic chromosomes, including the notion of a giant hereditary molecule (genoneme) and its structural functional organization, are considered. Different approaches to chromosome studies are discussed, ranging from the examination of a chromosome as a stained cell organelle and the visualization of individual chromosomes in a living cell to the identification of topological domains of human and murine chromosomes using 3C and 5C technologies. The prospects of studies of chromosome organization using up-to-date methods of cytology, molecular biology, and bioinformatics are discussed.
22955621	227	2012	Nature	The long-range interaction landscape of gene promoters.	The vast non-coding portion of the human genome is full of functional elements and disease-causing regulatory variants. The principles defining the relationships between these elements and distal target genes remain unknown. Promoters and distal elements can engage in looping interactions that have been implicated in gene regulation. Here we have applied chromosome conformation capture carbon copy (5C) to interrogate comprehensively interactions between transcription start sites (TSSs) and distal elements in 1% of the human genome representing the ENCODE pilot project regions. 5C maps were generated for GM12878, K562 and HeLa-S3 cells and results were integrated with data from the ENCODE consortium. In each cell line we discovered &gt;1,000 long-range interactions between promoters and distal sites that include elements resembling enhancers, promoters and CTCF-bound sites. We observed significant correlations between gene expression, promoter-enhancer interactions and the presence of enhancer RNAs. Long-range interactions show marked asymmetry with a bias for interactions with elements located ∼120 kilobases upstream of the TSS. Long-range interactions are often not blocked by sites bound by CTCF and cohesin, indicating that many of these sites do not demarcate physically insulated gene domains. Furthermore, only ∼7% of looping interactions are with the nearest gene, indicating that genomic proximity is not a simple predictor for long-range interactions. Finally, promoters and distal elements are engaged in multiple long-range interactions to form complex networks. Our results start to place genes and regulatory elements in three-dimensional context, revealing their functional relationships.
22495304	177	2012	Nature	Spatial partitioning of the regulatory landscape of the X-inactivation centre.	In eukaryotes transcriptional regulation often involves multiple long-range elements and is influenced by the genomic environment. A prime example of this concerns the mouse X-inactivation centre (Xic), which orchestrates the initiation of X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) by controlling the expression of the non-protein-coding Xist transcript. The extent of Xic sequences required for the proper regulation of Xist remains unknown. Here we use chromosome conformation capture carbon-copy (5C) and super-resolution microscopy to analyse the spatial organization of a 4.5-megabases (Mb) region including Xist. We discover a series of discrete 200-kilobase to 1 Mb topologically associating domains (TADs), present both before and after cell differentiation and on the active and inactive X. TADs align with, but do not rely on, several domain-wide features of the epigenome, such as H3K27me3 or H3K9me2 blocks and lamina-associated domains. TADs also align with coordinately regulated gene clusters. Disruption of a TAD boundary causes ectopic chromosomal contacts and long-range transcriptional misregulation. The Xist/Tsix sense/antisense unit illustrates how TADs enable the spatial segregation of oppositely regulated chromosomal neighbourhoods, with the respective promoters of Xist and Tsix lying in adjacent TADs, each containing their known positive regulators. We identify a novel distal regulatory region of Tsix within its TAD, which produces a long intervening RNA, Linx. In addition to uncovering a new principle of cis-regulatory architecture of mammalian chromosomes, our study sets the stage for the full genetic dissection of the X-inactivation centre.
22215806	106	2012	Genes Dev	A decade of 3C technologies: insights into nuclear organization.	Over the past 10 years, the development of chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology and the subsequent genomic variants thereof have enabled the analysis of nuclear organization at an unprecedented resolution and throughput. The technology relies on the original and, in hindsight, remarkably simple idea that digestion and religation of fixed chromatin in cells, followed by the quantification of ligation junctions, allows for the determination of DNA contact frequencies and insight into chromosome topology. Here we evaluate and compare the current 3C-based methods (including 4C [chromosome conformation capture-on-chip], 5C [chromosome conformation capture carbon copy], HiC, and ChIA-PET), summarize their contribution to our current understanding of genome structure, and discuss how shape influences genome function.
22353245	5	2012	Genet Res (Camb)	Extensive epistasis for olfactory behaviour, sleep and waking activity in Drosophila melanogaster.	Epistasis is an important feature of the genetic architecture of quantitative traits, but the dynamics of epistatic interactions in natural populations and the relationship between epistasis and pleiotropy remain poorly understood. Here, we studied the effects of epistatic modifiers that segregate in a wild-derived Drosophila melanogaster population on the mutational effects of P-element insertions in Semaphorin-5C (Sema-5c) and Calreticulin (Crc), pleiotropic genes that affect olfactory behaviour and startle behaviour and, in the case of Crc, sleep phenotypes. We introduced Canton-S B (CSB) third chromosomes with or without a P-element insertion at the Crc or Sema-5c locus in multiple wild-derived inbred lines of the Drosophila melanogaster Genetic Reference Panel (DGRP) and assessed the effects of epistasis on the olfactory response to benzaldehyde and, for Crc, also on sleep. In each case, we found substantial epistasis and significant variation in the magnitude of epistasis. The predominant direction of epistatic effects was to suppress the mutant phenotype. These observations support a previous study on startle behaviour using the same D. melanogaster chromosome substitution lines, which concluded that suppressing epistasis may buffer the effects of new mutations. However, epistatic effects are not correlated among the different phenotypes. Thus, suppressing epistasis appears to be a pervasive general feature of natural populations to protect against the effects of new mutations, but different epistatic interactions modulate different phenotypes affected by mutations at the same pleiotropic gene.
23137922	3	2012	Methods	From cells to chromatin: capturing snapshots of genome organization with 5C technology.	In eukaryotes, genome organization can be observed on many levels and at different scales. This organization is important not only to reduce chromosome length but also for the proper execution of various biological processes. High-resolution mapping of spatial chromatin structure was made possible by the development of the chromosome conformation capture (3C) technique. 3C uses chemical cross-linking followed by proximity-based ligation of fragmented DNA to capture frequently interacting chromatin segments in cell populations. Several 3C-related methods capable of higher chromosome conformation mapping throughput were reported afterwards. These techniques include the 3C-carbon copy (5C) approach, which offers the advantage of being highly quantitative and reproducible. We provide here an updated reference protocol for the production of 5C libraries analyzed by next-generation sequencing or onto microarrays. A procedure used to verify that 3C library templates bear the high quality required to produce superior 5C libraries is also described. We believe that this detailed protocol will help guide researchers in probing spatial genome organization and its role in various biological processes.
22929767	3	2012	Methods Enzymol	A Torrent of data: mapping chromatin organization using 5C and high-throughput sequencing.	The study of three-dimensional genome organization is an exciting research area, which has benefited from the rapid development of high-resolution molecular mapping techniques over the past decade. These methods are derived from the chromosome conformation capture (3C) technique and are each aimed at improving some aspect of 3C. All 3C technologies use formaldehyde fixation and proximity-based ligation to capture chromatin contacts in cell populations and consider in vivo spatial proximity more or less inversely proportional to the frequency of measured interactions. The 3C-carbon copy (5C) method is among the most quantitative of these approaches. 5C is extremely robust and can be used to study chromatin organization at various scales. Here, we present a modified 5C analysis protocol adapted for sequencing with an Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine™ (PGM™). We explain how Torrent 5C libraries are produced and sequenced. We also describe the statistical and computational methods we developed to normalize and analyze raw Torrent 5C sequence data. The Torrent 5C protocol should facilitate the study of in vivo chromatin architecture at high resolution because it benefits from high accuracy, greater speed, low running costs, and the flexibility of in-house next-generation sequencing.
22326837	3	2012	Eur J Med Genet	A novel c.2T &gt; C mutation of the KDM5C/JARID1C gene in one large family with X-linked intellectual disability.	Mutations in the KDM5C gene (lysine (K)-specific demethylase 5C gene; also known as JARID1C and SMCX; MIM 314690) were recently associated with X-linked intellectual disability (XLID). To date only two case reports and five studies that screen for mutations in the KDM5C gene have been published, with 21 mutations reported. Herein we present a large family with XLID caused by a novel mutation c.2T &gt; C in the start codon of the KDM5C gene, presumably leading to loss of gene translation. Six sibs out of seven (two sons and four sisters) and their mother carry this mutation. Two affected males presented the distinctive clinical phenotype, characterized by moderate short stature, clumsy gait, ataxia, increased muscle tone and brisk tendon reflexes. They constantly bore a happy and smiling facial expression, with a protruding tongue. We hereby offer the first thorough description of five affected females with the KDM5C gene mutation. Most frequent clinical features were short stature, facial dysmorphism and developmental problems. X-chromosome inactivation study showed completely skewed inactivation pattern of mutation-carrying chromosome in all affected female patients.
22776362	0	2012	Methods	Chromosome conformation capture assays in bacteria.	Bacterial chromosomes must be compacted by three-orders of magnitude to fit within the cell. While such compaction could in theory yield disordered structures, it is becoming increasingly clear that bacterial chromosomes are in fact arranged in regular and reproducible fashions and that their configurations are tightly connected to fundamental processes such as chromosome segregation. Nonetheless, due to throughput and resolution limitations associated with traditional assays, many question regarding bacterial chromosome structure and its relation to genome function remain. Here, I review the related technologies, chromosome conformation capture (3C) and chromosome conformation capture carbon copy (5C), which my collaborators and I recently introduced as tools to probe the high-resolution folding of entire bacterial genomes. These technologies utilize covalent cross-linking and proximity ligation to facilitate the measurement of the spatial positioning of hundreds of genomic loci, thereby opening the door to high-throughput studies of bacterial chromosome structure. Hence, 3C and 5C represent powerful new tools for assaying the three-dimensional architecture of bacterial genomes.
22017872	54	2011	Mol Cell	The three-dimensional architecture of a bacterial genome and its alteration by genetic perturbation.	We have determined the three-dimensional (3D) architecture of the Caulobacter crescentus genome by combining genome-wide chromatin interaction detection, live-cell imaging, and computational modeling. Using chromosome conformation capture carbon copy (5C), we derive ~13 kb resolution 3D models of the Caulobacter genome. The resulting models illustrate that the genome is ellipsoidal with periodically arranged arms. The parS sites, a pair of short contiguous sequence elements known to be involved in chromosome segregation, are positioned at one pole, where they anchor the chromosome to the cell and contribute to the formation of a compact chromatin conformation. Repositioning these elements resulted in rotations of the chromosome that changed the subcellular positions of most genes. Such rotations did not lead to large-scale changes in gene expression, indicating that genome folding does not strongly affect gene regulation. Collectively, our data suggest that genome folding is globally dictated by the parS sites and chromosome segregation.
22026390	19	2011	BMC Bioinformatics	Three-dimensional modeling of chromatin structure from interaction frequency data using Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling.	BACKGROUND: Long-range interactions between regulatory DNA elements such as enhancers, insulators and promoters play an important role in regulating transcription. As chromatin contacts have been found throughout the human genome and in different cell types, spatial transcriptional control is now viewed as a general mechanism of gene expression regulation. Chromosome Conformation Capture Carbon Copy (5C) and its variant Hi-C are techniques used to measure the interaction frequency (IF) between specific regions of the genome. Our goal is to use the IF data generated by these experiments to computationally model and analyze three-dimensional chromatin organization.RESULTS: We formulate a probabilistic model linking 5C/Hi-C data to physical distances and describe a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach called MCMC5C to generate a representative sample from the posterior distribution over structures from IF data. Structures produced from parallel MCMC runs on the same dataset demonstrate that our MCMC method mixes quickly and is able to sample from the posterior distribution of structures and find subclasses of structures. Structural properties (base looping, condensation, and local density) were defined and their distribution measured across the ensembles of structures generated. We applied these methods to a biological model of human myelomonocyte cellular differentiation and identified distinct chromatin conformation signatures (CCSs) corresponding to each of the cellular states. We also demonstrate the ability of our method to run on Hi-C data and produce a model of human chromosome 14 at 1Mb resolution that is consistent with previously observed structural properties as measured by 3D-FISH.CONCLUSIONS: We believe that tools like MCMC5C are essential for the reliable analysis of data from the 3C-derived techniques such as 5C and Hi-C. By integrating complex, high-dimensional and noisy datasets into an easy to interpret ensemble of three-dimensional conformations, MCMC5C allows researchers to reliably interpret the result of their assay and contrast conformations under different conditions.AVAILABILITY: http://Dostielab.biochem.mcgill.ca.
22199269	12	2011	Anticancer Res	Histone-modifier gene expression profiles are associated with pathological and clinical outcomes in human breast cancer.	BACKGROUND: Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is under normal circumstances tightly controlled by the specific methylation of cytosine residues in CpG dinucleotides and coordinated by adjustments in the histone-dependent configuration of chromatin. Following our original report, providing the first description of potential tumor suppressor function associated with the histone methyltransferase SET domain containing 2 (SETD2) in breast cancer, the objective of this study was to determine the expression profiles of 16 further histone-modifier genes in a well annotated cohort of patients with primary operable breast cancer.MATERIALS AND METHODS: Breast cancer tissues (n=127) and normal tissues (n=33) underwent RNA extraction and reverse transcription, and histone-modifier gene transcript levels were determined using real-time quantitative PCR. The histone-modifier genes included: histone acetyltransferases (cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein (CREBBP)); class I (histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)), II (histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5)) and III (sirtuin 1 (SIRT1)) histone deacetylases; and histone methyltransferases (SET domain containing suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 1 (SUV39H1) and suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 2 (SUV39H2)) amongst others. Expression levels were analysed against tumor size, grade, nodal involvement, histological subtype, receptor status, TNM stage, Nottingham Prognostic Index, and disease-free and overall survival over a 10-year follow-up period.RESULTS: Expression of histone-modifier genes in breast cancer differed significantly from those in normal tissue (HDAC5, HDAC1, lysine (K)-specific demethylase 4A (KDM4A) and lysine (K)-specific demethylase 6A (KDM6A)). Differences in expression profiles were also found to exist between individual breast tumors and, in some cases, were significantly associated with conventional pathological parameters and prognostic indices: tumor grade (K (lysine) acetyltransferase 5 (KAT5), HDAC1, KDM4A, SUV39H1 and KDM6A)); TNM stage (SUV39H1, K (lysine) acetyltransferase 2B (KAT2B), lysine (K)-specific demethylase 1A (KDM1A), KDM4A, lysine (K)-specific demethylase 5C (KDM5C), K (lysine) acetyltransferase 8 (KAT8), HDAC5 and KAT5)); Nottingham Prognostic Index (KDM5C, myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL), KAT8 and SET and MYND domain containing 3 (SMYD3)); receptor status (KAT5, SMYD3 and KDM1A); histological type (KAT5, KDM5C, KAT8, KDM4A and MLL); disease-free survival (SUV39H1, SMYD3, HDAC5, KDM6A, HDAC1, KDM1A, KDM4A, KAT8, KDM5C, KAT5 and MLL) and overall survival (KAT8). Significant correlations were identified between the differential expression profiles of particular histone-modifying genes.CONCLUSION: Expression levels of histone-modifier genes in breast cancer differ significantly from normal tissue. Differences in expression profiles exist between breast tumors and are significantly associated with conventional pathological parameters and clinical outcomes. Further study is warranted to determine the consequences of altered expression for each specific histone-modifier gene and the biological and clinical implications of combinatorial variations in expression profiles. Histone-modifier enzymes offer utility as biomarkers and potential for targeted therapeutic strategies.
22011446	12	2011	J Clin Pathol	HER2 genetic heterogeneity in breast carcinoma.	AIMS: To determine the frequency of HER2 genetic heterogeneity according to the recent American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and College of American Pathologists (CAP) definition (2009) in invasive breast carcinoma, and to identify clinicopathological features that characterise breast carcinomas with HER2 genetic heterogeneity.METHODS: 530 invasive breast carcinomas were retrospectively analysed for HER2 genetic heterogeneity, and investigated for a potential association of HER2 genetic heterogeneity with other HER2 FISH findings, clinicopathological parameters, oestrogen/progesterone receptor expression and DNA cytometric parameters in breast carcinomas with an equivocal (2+) HER2 immunohistochemical score.RESULTS: The overall frequency of HER2 genetic heterogeneity was 14.7% in a cohort of 218 consecutive breast carcinomas. HER2 genetic heterogeneity was most frequent in invasive breast carcinomas with an equivocal (2+) HER2 immunohistochemical score. Among the 151 carcinomas lacking HER2 amplification, 16.1% showed HER2 genetic heterogeneity. In an extended cohort of 345 carcinomas with a (2+) HER2 score, the frequency of HER2 genetic heterogeneity was 41%, and was associated with the absence of HER2 gene clusters, chromosome 17 polysomy, histological tumour grade, DNA ploidy category and 5c exceeding rate.CONCLUSION: HER2 genetic heterogeneity according to the ASCO/CAP definition is frequent in breast carcinoma, and is most often present in carcinomas with an equivocal (2+) HER2 score. Many carcinomas with HER2 genetic heterogeneity have a negative HER2 amplification status, although they contain a significant number of tumour cells with HER2 gene amplification. Single cell scoring of the HER2/17 centromeric probe (CEP17) ratio is necessary to identify carcinomas with HER2 genetic heterogeneity, because they lack specific clinicopathological characteristics.
22053830	5	2011	Diagn Pathol	Correlation between DNA ploidy, metaphase high-resolution comparative genomic hybridization results and clinical outcome of synovial sarcoma.	BACKGROUND: Although synovial sarcoma is the 3rd most commonly occurring mesenchymal tumor in young adults, usually with a highly aggressive clinical course; remarkable differences can be seen regarding the clinical outcome. According to comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) data published in the literature, the simple and complex karyotypes show a correlation between the prognosis and clinical outcome. In addition, the connection between DNA ploidy and clinical course is controversial. The aim of this study was using a fine-tuning interpretation of our DNA ploidy results and to compare these with metaphase high-resolution CGH (HR-CGH) results.METHODS: DNA ploidy was determined on Feulgen-stained smears in 56 synovial sarcoma cases by image cytometry; follow up was available in 46 cases (average: 78 months). In 9 cases HR-CGH analysis was also available.RESULTS: 10 cases were found DNA-aneuploid, 46 were DNA-diploid by image cytometry. With fine-tuning of the diploid cases according to the 5c exceeding events (single cell aneuploidy), 33 cases were so called &quot;simple-diploid&quot; (without 5c exceeding events) and 13 cases were &quot;complex-diploid&quot;; containing 5c exceeding events (any number). Aneuploid tumors contained large numbers of genetic alterations with the sum gain of at least 2 chromosomes (A-, B- or C-group) detected by HR-CGH. In the &quot;simple-diploid&quot; cases no or few genetic alterations could be detected, whereas the &quot;complex-diploid&quot; samples numerous aberrations (equal or more than 3) could be found.CONCLUSIONS: Our results show a correlation between the DNA-ploidy, a fine-tuned DNA-ploidy and the HR-CGH results. Furthermore, we found significant correlation between the different ploidy groups and the clinical outcome (p &lt; 0.05).
21866859	0	2011	Genetika	[Comparative cytogenetic analysis of hexaploid Avena L. species].	Using C-banding method and in situ hybridization with the 45S and 5S rRNA gene probes, six hexaploid species of the genus Avena L. with the ACD genome constitution were studied to reveal evolutionary karyotypic changes. Similarity in the C-banding patterns of chromosomal and in the patterns of distribution of the rRNA gene families suggests a common origin of all hexaploid species. Avena fatua is characterized by the broadest intraspecific variation of the karyotype; this species displays chromosomal variants typical of other hexaploid species of Avena. For instance, a translocation with the involvement of chromosome 5C marking A. occidentalis was discovered in many A. fatua accessions, whereas in other representatives of this species this chromosome is highly similar to the chromosome of A. sterilis. Only A. fatua and A. sativa show slight changes in the morphology and in the C-banding pattern of chromosome 2C. These results can be explained either by a hybrid origin of A. fatua or by the fact that this species is an intermediate evolutionary form of hexaploid oats. The 7C-17 translocation was identified in all studied accessions of wild and weedy species (A. sterilis, A. fatua, A. ludoviciana, and A. occidentalis) and in most A. sativa cultivars, but it was absent in A. byzantina and in two accessions of A. sativa. The origin and evolution of the Avena hexaploid species are discussed in context of the results.
21573878	0	2011	Hum Cell	Haploid unit-ploidy transition of tetraploid and octaploid H1 (ES) cells in long-term culturing.	Haploid unit-ploidy transition in tetraploid and octaploid mouse H1 (ES) cells (4H1 and 8H1 cells, respectively) during long-term culturing was observed using flow cytometry. The DNA content of 4H1 cells was elevated from 3.5C to 4.5C, and that of 8H1 cells was degraded from 6.5C to 5.5C, in addition to gradual DNA loss (C: complement). The timing of the transition was not predetermined. Cell cycle parameters, doubling time and phase durations, were essentially the same before and after the transition, suggesting that most cells in a cell population were induced to undergo the ploidy transition at the same time. Cellular morphology was altered before and after the transition, suggesting that the ploidy shift changed cellular characteristics; however, pluripotency was maintained irrespective of DNA content. Cell volume correlated with DNA content during the final stage of culturing. Diploid and hexaploid H1 (ES) cells--2H1 and 6H1 cells, respectively--were used as control cells in which the ploidy was maintained for about 300 days of culturing. The haploid unit-ploidy transition was explained using a hypothesis concerning the DNA structure of polyploid cells: closing homologous chromosomes causes inhomogeneous cell division accompanying a haploid DNA set, suggesting the existence of a coupling apparatus connecting DNA fibers with a single haploid DNA set.
21131981	55	2010	Nat Struct Mol Biol	The three-dimensional folding of the α-globin gene domain reveals formation of chromatin globules.	We developed a general approach that combines chromosome conformation capture carbon copy (5C) with the Integrated Modeling Platform (IMP) to generate high-resolution three-dimensional models of chromatin at the megabase scale. We applied this approach to the ENm008 domain on human chromosome 16, containing the α-globin locus, which is expressed in K562 cells and silenced in lymphoblastoid cells (GM12878). The models accurately reproduce the known looping interactions between the α-globin genes and their distal regulatory elements. Further, we find using our approach that the domain folds into a single globular conformation in GM12878 cells, whereas two globules are formed in K562 cells. The central cores of these globules are enriched for transcribed genes, whereas nontranscribed chromatin is more peripheral. We propose that globule formation represents a higher-order folding state related to clustering of transcribed genes around shared transcription machineries, as previously observed by microscopy.
21044597	8	2010	Biophys J	Histone depletion facilitates chromatin loops on the kilobasepair scale.	The packing of eukaryotic DNA in the nucleus is decisive for its function; for instance, contact between remote genome sites constitutes a basic feature of gene regulation. Interactions among regulatory proteins, DNA binding, and transcription activation are facilitated by looping of the intervening chromatin. Such long-range interactions depend on the bending flexibility of chromatin, i.e., the ring-closure probability is a directly measurable indicator of polymer flexibility. The applicability of a wormlike chain model to naked DNA has been widely accepted. However, whether this model also suffices to describe the flexibility of eukaryotic interphase chromatin is still a matter of discussion. Here we compare both 5C data from a gene desert and data from fluorescence in situ hybridization with the results of a Monte Carlo simulation of chromatin fibers with and without histone depletion. We then estimate the ring-closure probabilities of simulated fibers with estimates from analytical calculations and show that the wormlike chain model grossly underestimates chromatin flexibility for sharp bends. Most importantly, we find that only fibers with random depletion of linker histones or nucleosomes can explain the probability of random chromatin contacts on small length scales that play an important role in gene regulation. It is possible that missing linker histones and nucleosomes are not just simple, unavoidable, randomly occurring defects, but instead play a regulatory role in gene expression.
20827597	5	2010	Methods Mol Biol	Computing chromosome conformation.	The &quot;Chromosome Conformation Capture&quot; (3C) and 3C-related technologies are used to measure physical contacts between DNA segments at high resolution in vivo. 3C studies indicate that genomes are likely organized into dynamic networks of physical contacts between genes and regulatory DNA elements. These interactions are mediated by proteins and are important for the regulation of genes. For these reasons, mapping physical connectivity networks with 3C-related approaches will be essential to fully understand how genes are regulated. The 3C-Carbon Copy (5C) technology can be used to measure chromatin contacts genome-scale within (cis) or between (trans) chromosomes. Although unquestionably powerful, this approach can be challenging to implement without proper understanding and application of publicly available bioinformatics tools. This chapter explains how 5C studies are performed and describes stepwise how to use currently available bioinformatics tools for experimental design, data analysis, and interpretation.
20658121	1	2010	Theor Appl Genet	A new chromosome nomenclature system for oat (Avena sativa L. and A. byzantina C. Koch) based on FISH analysis of monosomic lines.	Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with multiple probes was used to analyze mitotic and meiotic chromosome spreads of Avena sativa cv 'Sun II' monosomic lines, and of A. byzantina cv 'Kanota' monosomic lines from spontaneous haploids. The probes used were A. strigosa pAs120a (a repetitive sequence abundant in A-genome chromatin), A. murphyi pAm1 (a repetitive sequence abundant in C-genome chromatin), A. strigosa pITS (internal transcribed spacer of rDNA) and the wheat rDNA probes pTa71 (nucleolus organizer region or NOR) and pTa794 (5S). Simultaneous and sequential FISH employing pairs of these probes allowed the identification and genome assignation of all chromosomes. FISH mapping using mitotic and meiotic metaphases facilitated the genomic and chromosomal identification of the monosome in each line. Of the 17 'Sun II' lines analyzed, 13 distinct monosomic lines were found, corresponding to four monosomes of the A-genome, five of the C-genome and four of the D-genome. In addition, 12 distinct monosomic lines were detected among the 20 'Kanota' lines examined, corresponding to six monosomes of the A-genome, three of the C-genome and three of the D-genome. The results show that 19 chromosomes out of 21 of the complement are represented by monosomes between the two genetic backgrounds. The identity of the remaining chromosomes can be deduced either from one intergenomic translocation detected on both 'Sun II' and 'Kanota' lines, or from the single reciprocal, intergenomic translocation detected among the 'Sun II' lines. These results permit a new system to be proposed for numbering the 21 chromosome pairs of the hexaploid oat complement. Accordingly, the A-genome contains chromosomes 8A, 11A, 13A, 15A, 16A, 17A and 19A; the C-genome contains chromosomes 1C, 2C, 3C, 4C, 5C, 6C and 7C; and the D-genome consists of chromosomes 9D, 10D, 12D, 14D, 18D, 20D and 21D. Moreover, the FISH patterns of 16 chromosomes in 'Sun II' and 15 in 'Kanota' suggest that these chromosomes could be involved in intergenomic translocations. By comparing the identities of individually translocated chromosomes in the two hexaploid species with those of other hexaploids, we detected different types of intergenomic translocations.
20153999	0	2010	Orv Hetil	[Molecular diagnosis and therapeutic measures in patients with dyskeratosis congenita].	Dyskeratosis congenita is a rare genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by bone marrow failure and premature ageing. Current knowledge on clinical manifestations, molecular pathomechanisms, diagnostic criteria and therapeutic possibilities of patients with dyskeratosis congenita are described. Mutation analysis of the gene encoding for dyskerin revealed the c.IVS2-5C&gt;G splice site mutation. The importance of early diagnosis in order to prevent severe invasive infections and non-infectious complications is emphasized. Family screening is important to identify carriers as prenatal genetic diagnosis conveys great benefits for family planning.
19374771	34	2009	Genome Biol	Chromatin conformation signatures of cellular differentiation.	One of the major genomics challenges is to better understand how correct gene expression is orchestrated. Recent studies have shown how spatial chromatin organization is critical in the regulation of gene expression. Here, we developed a suite of computer programs to identify chromatin conformation signatures with 5C technology http://Dostielab.biochem.mcgill.ca. We identified dynamic HoxA cluster chromatin conformation signatures associated with cellular differentiation. Genome-wide chromatin conformation signature identification might uniquely identify disease-associated states and represent an entirely novel class of human disease biomarkers.
19588093	22	2009	Methods Mol Biol	Chromosome conformation capture (from 3C to 5C) and its ChIP-based modification.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) methodology was developed to study spatial organization of long genomic regions in living cells. Briefly, chromatin is fixed with formaldehyde in vivo to cross-link interacting sites, digested with a restriction enzyme and ligated at a low DNA concentration so that ligation between cross-linked fragments is favored over ligation between random fragments. Ligation products are then analyzed and quantified by PCR. So far, semi-quantitative PCR methods were widely used to estimate the ligation frequencies. However, it is often important to estimate the ligation frequencies more precisely which is only possible by using the real-time PCR. At the same time, it is equally necessary to monitor the specificity of PCR amplification. That is why the real-time PCR with TaqMan probes is becoming more and more popular in 3C studies. In this chapter, we describe the general protocol for 3C analysis with the subsequent estimation of ligation frequencies by using the real-time PCR technology with TaqMan probes. We discuss in details all steps of the experimental procedure paying special attention to weak points and possible ways to solve the problems. A special attention is also paid to the problems in interpretation of the results and necessary control experiments. Besides, in theory, we consider other approaches to analysis of the ligation products used in frames of the so-called 4C and 5C methods. The recently developed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-loop assay representing a combination of 3C and ChIP is also discussed.
19588094	13	2009	Methods Mol Biol	Determining spatial chromatin organization of large genomic regions using 5C technology.	Spatial organization of chromatin plays an important role at multiple levels of genome regulation. On a global scale, its function is evident in processes like metaphase and chromosome segregation. On a detailed level, long-range interactions between regulatory elements and promoters are essential for proper gene regulation. Microscopic techniques like FISH can detect chromatin contacts, although the resolution is generally low making detection of enhancer-promoter interaction difficult. The 3C methodology allows for high-resolution analysis of chromatin interactions. 3C is now widely used and has revealed that long-range looping interactions between genomic elements are widespread. However, studying chromatin interactions in large genomic regions by 3C is very labor intensive. This limitation is overcome by the 5C technology. 5C is an adaptation of 3C, in which the concurrent use of thousands of primers permits the simultaneous detection of millions of chromatin contacts. The design of the 5C primers is critical because this will determine which and how many chromatin interactions will be examined in the assay. Starting material for 5C is a 3C template. To make a 3C template, chromatin interactions in living cells are cross-linked using formaldehyde. Next, chromatin is digested and subsequently ligated under conditions favoring ligation events between cross-linked fragments. This yields a genome-wide 3C library of ligation products representing all chromatin interactions in vivo. 5C then employs multiplex ligation-mediated amplification to detect, in a single assay, up to millions of unique ligation products present in the 3C library. The resulting 5C library can be analyzed by microarray analysis or deep sequencing. The observed abundance of a 5C product is a measure of the interaction frequency between the two corresponding chromatin fragments. The power of the 5C technique described in this chapter is the high-throughput, high-resolution, and quantitative way in which the spatial organization of chromatin can be examined.
19168259	13	2009	Lung Cancer	Core classification of lung cancer: correlating nuclear size and mitoses with ploidy and clinicopathological parameters.	We attempted to establish a microscopy based tumour characterization providing insight into the genetics of cancer cells and in particular their DNA ploidy. The core classification defined semi-quantitative criteria for scoring the nuclear size ranging from small (core score 1) to giant nuclei (core score 4). By listing all nuclear sizes according to their relative frequencies it provided a measure for core size variability as a correlate of nuclear pleomorphism. Additionally, the mitosis size, their variability and the presence/abundance of tripolar and tetrapolar mitoses were determined. This classification was applied to 155 lung cancer samples from all major histologic types and the results were correlated with the analysis by DNA image cytometry and patient survival. The morphological assessments correlated highly significantly with the DNA ploidy parameters, e.g. small cell lung carcinomas showed the smallest values for nuclear size (mean core score of 1.18) and DNA content (DNA index mean of 2.08c) being highly significantly different from adenocarcinomas (1.95/3.10c), large cell lung carcinoma (2.00/3.26c) and squamous cell carcinoma (2.20/3.42c). In non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) in general and adenocarcinoma in particular, the core size variability correlated significantly with grading and survival. Furthermore, parameters indicative for chromosomal variability, i.e. 2c deviation index and 5c exceeding rate, were predictors of poor survival in NSCLC patients. As a complement to histologic tumour diagnosis the core classification should help to better stratify cancer subtypes.
19458056	12	2009	Clin Cancer Res	Interaction of TFAP2C with the estrogen receptor-alpha promoter is controlled by chromatin structure.	PURPOSE: Transcriptional regulation of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) involves both epigenetic mechanisms and trans-active factors, such as TFAP2C, which induces ERalpha transcription through an AP-2 regulatory region in the ERalpha promoter. Attempts to induce endogenous ERalpha expression in ERalpha-negative breast carcinomas by forced overexpression of TFAP2C have not been successful. We hypothesize that epigenetic chromatin structure alters the activity of TFAP2C at the ERalpha promoter.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: DNA methylation, histone acetylation, and chromatin accessibility were examined at the ERalpha promoter in a panel of breast carcinoma cell lines. TFAP2C and polymerase II binding were analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Epigenetic chromatin structure was altered using drug treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) and trichostatin A (TSA).RESULTS: The ERalpha promoter in the ERalpha-negative lines MDA-MB-231, MCF10A, and MCF7-5C show CpG island methylation, histone 3 lysine 9 deacetylation, and decreased chromatin accessibility compared with ERalpha-positive cell lines MCF7 and T47-D. Treatment with AZA/TSA increased chromatin accessibility at the ERalpha promoter and allowed TFAP2C to induce ERalpha expression in ERalpha-negative cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that binding of TFAP2C to the ERalpha promoter is blocked in ERalpha-negative cells but that treatment with AZA/TSA enabled TFAP2C and polymerase II binding.CONCLUSION: We conclude that the activity of TFAP2C at specific target genes depends upon epigenetic chromatin structure. Furthermore, the combination of increasing chromatin accessibility and inducing TFAP2C provides a more robust activation of the ERalpha gene in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells.
19365833	9	2009	Am J Med Genet A	Novel exon 1 mutations in MECP2 implicate isoform MeCP2_e1 in classical Rett syndrome.	Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in the X-linked MECP2 gene. Recently, a new MeCP2 isoform was described, MeCP2_e1, which skips exon 2 and has an alternative N-terminus, translated from exon 1, whereas MeCP2_e2 is translated from a start codon in exon 2. Since the incorporation of exon 1 into standard sequencing protocols for RTT, few exon 1 mutations have been described and are thus assumed to be only rare causes of RTT. Also, studies have suggested that the frameshift mutations identified in exon 1 affect both isoforms. Our aim in this study was to assess the frequency of mutations in exon 1, their relationship to phenotype, and the implications on the etiological role for the isoform MeCP2_e1 in RTT, versus the previously described isoform, MeCP2_e2. We sequenced MECP2 in 51 females with various clinical presentations, including developmental delay, autism, atypical and classical RTT, referred to our laboratories for testing. In patients with identified mutations, X-chromosome inactivation was analyzed. We identified four patients with exon 1 mutations; three were novel (c.1A &gt; T; c.1A &gt; G; c.5C &gt; T), two of which affected the start codon, one a missense change, and one patient had a previously reported splice site mutation, c.62 + 1delGT. The four patients fit criteria for classical RTT, and thus these findings add support to previous reports that exon 1 mutations may be associated with a severe phenotype. Also, these findings add significant weight to the mounting evidence suggesting that the MeCP2_e1 isoform is the etiologically relevant form of the protein.
19588092	5	2009	Methods Mol Biol	DamID: a methylation-based chromatin profiling approach.	Gene expression is a dynamic process and is tightly connected to changes in chromatin structure and nuclear organization (Schneider, R. and Grosschedl, R., 2007, Genes Dev. 21, 3027-3043; Kosak, S. T. and Groudine, M., 2004, Genes Dev. 18, 1371-1384). Our ability to understand the intimate interactions between proteins and the rapidly changing chromatin environment requires methods that will be able to provide accurate, sensitive, and unbiased mapping of these interactions in vivo (van Steensel, B., 2005, Nat. Genet. 37 Suppl, S18-24). One such tool is DamID chromatin profiling, a methylation-based tagging method used to identify the direct genomic loci bound by sequence-specific transcription factors, co-factors as well as chromatin- and nuclear-associated proteins genome wide (van Steensel, B. and Henikoff, S., 2000, Nat. Biotechnol. 18, 424-428; van Steensel, Delrow, and Henikoff, 2001, Nat. Genet. 27, 304-308). Combined with other functional genomic methods and bioinformatics analysis (such as expression profiles and 5C analysis), DamID emerges as a powerful tool for analysis of chromatin structure and function in eukaryotes. DamID allows the detection of the direct genomic targets of any given factor independent of antibodies and without the need for DNA cross-linking. It is highly valuable for mapping proteins that associate with the genome indirectly or loosely (e.g., co-factors). DamID is based on the ability to fuse a bacterial Dam-methylase to a protein of interest and subsequently mark the factor's genomic binding site by adenine methylation. This marking is simple, highly specific, sensitive, inert, and can be done in both cell culture and living organisms. Below is a short description of the method, followed by a step-by-step protocol for performing DamID in Drosophila cells and embryos. Due to space limitations, the reader is referred to recent reviews that compare the method with other profiling techniques such as ChIP-chip as well as protocols for performing DamID in mammalian cells (NSouthall, T. D. and Brand, A. H., 2007, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 14, 869-871; Orian, A., 2006, Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 16, 157-164; Vogel, M. J., Peric-Hupkes, D. and van Steensel, B. 2007, Nat. Protoc. 2, 1467-1478).
19753663	1	2009	Acta Psychiatr Scand	An intron 1 polymorphism in the cholecystokinin-A receptor gene associated with schizophrenia in males.	OBJECTIVE: To identify whether a genetic variation (rs1800857; IVS1-5T&gt;C) in the neuropeptide cholecystokinin-A receptor (CCKAR) gene is a risk factor in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.METHOD: The variation was analysed in a case-control design comprising 508 patients with schizophrenia and 1619 control subjects. A possible functional impact of this variant on CCKAR protein synthesis through alterations in splicing was analysed in an exon-trapping assay.RESULTS: In males only, the risk variant, IVS1-5C, was associated with a significantly increased risk of schizophrenia. Carrying one risk allele was associated with an increased risk of 1.74 (Odds Ratio, OR) and homozygosity (CC) was associated with an OR of 3.19. The variation had no impact on protein synthesis of CCKAR.CONCLUSION: This is the first report associating the CCKAR gene variant with schizophrenia specifically in men. Our study strengthens the conclusion that a CCKAR dysfunction could be involved in the aetiology of schizophrenia.
18265398	13	2008	Curr Protoc Mol Biol	Chromosome conformation capture carbon copy technology.	Chromosome conformation capture (3C) is used to quantify physical DNA contacts in vivo at high resolution. 3C was first used in yeast to map the spatial chromatin organization of chromosome III, and in higher eukaryotes to demonstrate that genomic DNA elements regulate target genes by physically interacting with them. 3C has been widely adopted for small-scale analysis of functional chromatin interactions along (cis) or between (trans) chromosomes. For larger-scale applications, chromosome conformation capture carbon copy (5C) combines 3C with ligation-mediated amplification (LMA) to simultaneously quantify hundreds of thousands of physical DNA contacts by microarray or ultra-high-throughput DNA sequencing. 5C allows the mapping of extensive networks of physical interactions among large sets of genomic elements throughout the genome. Such networks can provide important biological insights, e.g., by identifying relationships between regulatory elements and their target genes. This unit describes 5C for large-scale analysis of cis- and trans-chromatin interactions in mammalian cells.
17971780	107	2007	Nat Methods	An evaluation of 3C-based methods to capture DNA interactions.	The shape of the genome is thought to play an important part in the coordination of transcription and other DNA-metabolic processes. Chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology allows us to analyze the folding of chromatin in the native cellular state at a resolution beyond that provided by current microscopy techniques. It has been used, for example, to demonstrate that regulatory DNA elements communicate with distant target genes through direct physical interactions that loop out the intervening chromatin fiber. Here we discuss the intricacies of 3C and new 3C-based methods including the 4C, 5C and ChIP-loop assay.
17446898	49	2007	Nat Protoc	Mapping networks of physical interactions between genomic elements using 5C technology.	Genomic elements separated by large genomic distances can physically interact to mediate long-range gene regulation and other chromosomal processes. Interactions between genomic elements can be detected using the chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology. We recently developed a high-throughput adaptation of 3C, 3C-carbon copy (5C), that is used to measure networks of millions of chromatin interactions in parallel. As in 3C, cells are treated with formaldehyde to cross-link chromatin interactions. The chromatin is solubilized, digested with a restriction enzyme and ligated at low DNA concentration to promote intra-molecular ligation of cross-linked DNA fragments. Ligation products are subsequently purified to generate a 3C library. The 5C technology then employs highly multiplexed ligation-mediated amplification (LMA) to detect and amplify 3C ligation junctions. The resulting 5C library of ligated primers is analyzed using either microarray detection or ultra-high-throughput DNA sequencing. The 5C protocol described here can be completed in 13 d.
16954542	207	2006	Genome Res	Chromosome Conformation Capture Carbon Copy (5C): a massively parallel solution for mapping interactions between genomic elements.	Physical interactions between genetic elements located throughout the genome play important roles in gene regulation and can be identified with the Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C) methodology. 3C converts physical chromatin interactions into specific ligation products, which are quantified individually by PCR. Here we present a high-throughput 3C approach, 3C-Carbon Copy (5C), that employs microarrays or quantitative DNA sequencing using 454-technology as detection methods. We applied 5C to analyze a 400-kb region containing the human beta-globin locus and a 100-kb conserved gene desert region. We validated 5C by detection of several previously identified looping interactions in the beta-globin locus. We also identified a new looping interaction in K562 cells between the beta-globin Locus Control Region and the gamma-beta-globin intergenic region. Interestingly, this region has been implicated in the control of developmental globin gene switching. 5C should be widely applicable for large-scale mapping of cis- and trans- interaction networks of genomic elements and for the study of higher-order chromosome structure.
16949934	4	2006	Hum Pathol	DNA and kinetic heterogeneity during the clonal evolution of adrenocortical proliferative lesions.	Monoclonal adrenocortical lesions show inverse correlation between proliferation and apoptosis, with proliferation being the single most important criterion of malignancy in adrenal lesions. No study yet has evaluated the variability of proliferation regarding the clonal pattern and diagnosis in adrenocortical nodular hyperplasias (ACNHs), adrenocortical adenomas (ACAs), and adrenocortical carcinomas (ACCs). We studied 69 ACNHs, 64 ACAs, and 23 ACCs (World Health Organization criteria) from 156 females. Clonality HUMARA test (from microdissected DNA samples), DNA content and proliferation analysis (slide and flow cytometry), and mitotic figure (MF) counting/50 high-power fields (HPFs) were performed in the same areas. Heterogeneity was assessed by 5cER (percentage of nonoctaploid cells with DNA content exceeding 5c) and standard deviation of MF/HPF. Statistics included analysis of variance/Student t tests regarding the clonal patterns and diagnosis. Polyclonal patterns were observed in 48 of 62 informative ACNHs and 7 of 56 informative ACAs, and monoclonal in 14 of 62 ACNHs, 49 of 56 ACAs, and 21 of 21 ACCs, with all hyperdiploid lesions (14 ACCs and 13 ACAs) being monoclonal. The standard deviation of MF/HPF progressively increased in ACNH-ACA-ACC (0.048 +/- 0.076, 0.110 +/- 0.097, 0.506 +/- 0.291, respectively; P = .0023), but did not differentiate ACNH/ACA. Only tetraploid percentage (P = .0496) and 5cER (P = .0352) distinguished polyclonal (3.64 +/- 2.20 and 0.14 +/- 0.15) from monoclonal (7.25 +/- 7.52 and 1.00 +/- 1.74) benign lesions. Malignancy significantly correlated with a low diploid percentage and high tetraploid percentage. Cell kinetic heterogeneity is the hallmark of adrenocortical neoplasms: tetraploid/hypertetraploid cell accumulation characterizes monoclonal lesions (suggesting nondisjunctional mitoses), whereas heterogeneously distributed mitotic figures and decreased diploid percentage define ACCs.
16462905	0	2006	Genome	DNA methylation, histone H3 methylation, and histone H4 acetylation in the genome of a crustacean.	In this work, we used antibodies against histone H3 trimethylated at lysine 9 (H3K9m3); against histone H4 acetylated at lysines 5, 8, 12, and 16 (H4ac); and against DNA methylated at 5C cytosine (m5C) to study the presence and distribution of these markers in the genome of the isopod crustacean Asellus aquaticus. The use of these 3 antibodies to immunolabel spermatogonial metaphases yields reproducible patterns on the chromosomes of this crustacean. The X and Y chromosomes present an identical banding pattern with each of the antibodies. The heterochromatic telomeric regions and the centromeric regions are rich in H3K9m3, but depleted in m5C and H4ac. Thus, m5C does not seem to be required to stabilize the silence of these regions in this organism.
15448749	2	2004	Pathol Oncol Res	Chromosomal aberrations accumulate in polyploid cells of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL).	Persistant infection with human papillomavirus (HPV) of the uterine cervix is related with cytological atypia (SIL), the oncogenic potential of which is unclear in a given time point of monitoring. HPV-induced genetic instability result in polyploidization as well as in low frequency random chromosome aberrations in squamous cells. In the present work we analyzed whether highly polyploid/aneuploid cells reflect genomic changes at the chromosomal level. 13 samples with the cytological diagnosis of HSIL were analyzed for HPV type and nuclear DNA content measured by laser scanning cytometry (LSC). Hyperdiploid cells with &gt;5c and with &gt;9c DNA content were further analyzed for numerical aberrations of the chromosomes 3 and 17 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) following repositioning. Cells with &gt;5c DNA content were found more frequently than cells with &gt;9c DNA content (5-98 and 1-44 cells, respectively). The FISH analysis demonstrated frequent polysomies, however, the rate of aneusomy (other than 2, 4, 8 or 16 chromosome copies) was significantly higher in cells with &gt;9c DNA content than in cells with &gt;5c DNA content or the normal diploid cells. The imbalance of chromosome 3 and 17 copy number was also increased in cells with &gt;9c DNA content. Moreover, in three out of the 13 analyzed HSIL samples, recurrent abnormal chromosome 3/17 ratio was demonstrated in a significant part of the cells, indicating a common origin of these cells. Highly polyploid/aneuploid cells in HSIL accumulate cytogenetic aberrations detectable by FISH analysis. These cells may reflect early changes with tumorigenic potential in a very concentrated fashion.
15515425	1	2004	Anticancer Res	A report of three patients treated with immunocell therapy with imatinib mesylate.	BACKGROUND: Immunocell therapy has been applied to patients with refractory cancer in clinical trials or as an unconventional cancer therapy, however the efficacy is still limited. To improve this efficacy, a combination therapy may be beneficial. Molecularly-targeted therapy acts directly on neoplasm cells to suppress their growth without causing myelosuppression.CASE REPORT: Recently, we encountered three patients treated by immunocell therapy with imatinib mesylate (Glivec). One patient was diagnosed as having Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) (+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and had a relapse-free survival of more than 24 months. The other two were diagnosed as having GIST; a partial response was observed in one which lasted more than 21 months, while the other's disease has been stabilized for more than 25 months. No side-effects were observed, other than those mentioned in the directions for the use of imatinib.CONCLUSION: Immunocell therapy may have a potent therapeutic effect when used in combination with molecularly-targeted therapy, which has few side-effects.
12837984	5	2003	Oncology	Molecular biologic characteristics of seven new cell lines of squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck and comparison to fresh tumor tissue.	BACKGROUND: Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most frequent malignant tumor of the upper aerodigestive tract. Cell lines of these tumors facilitate the investigation of various tumor biological parameters. This study was conducted to compare molecular biologic characteristics between cell lines and fresh tumor tissue.METHODS: In seven SCC-derived cell lines, cytokeratin 5/6 and cytokeratin 19 expression, DNA content, chromosome aberrations and tumorigenicity were assessed in nude rats. Unbalanced numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations were investigated by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), and results were compared to those obtained in fresh tumor tissues of the same patients.RESULTS: All cell lines expressed cytokeratins 5/6 and 19, indicating their epidermoid origin. Tumor growth after transplantation into nude rats occurred in five of seven cell lines. Routine histology and immunohistochemical examinations confirmed SCC. Aneuploidy was detected in all cell lines, with a 2c deviation index ranging from 1.9 through 9.5 and a 5c exceeding rate ranging from 2.6 through 36.7%. The most frequent chromosomal aberrations in cell lines were overrepresentations of chromosomal material on chromosomes 15q, 7p (5 cases each), 3q, 5p (4 cases each), and 11q and 17q (3 cases each) and losses of chromosomal material on chromosomes 3p, 18q (3 cases each), and 19p and 7q (2 cases each). Comparing these results to CGH analysis of fresh tumor tissue from the same patients, overrepresentations of chromosomal material on 10q, 20q and 21q, along with loss of chromosomal material on 4q was detected more frequently in primary tumors, whereas overrepresentations on 7p and loss of chromosomal material on 7q were more frequently detected in cell lines. Nevertheless, there was a high degree of similarity of chromosomal alterations in cell lines and corresponding fresh tumor tissue.CONCLUSION: The data suggest a high degree of genetic similarity between tumor cells of cell lines and the tumors from which they were derived. Therefore, these cell lines can serve as an accurate model to investigate cell biology of SCC in vitro.
12424525	0	2002	Chromosoma	The actin loci in the genus Drosophila: establishment of chromosomal homologies among five nearctic species of the Drosophila obscura group by in situ hybridization.	The actin genes of five nearctic species of the Drosophila obscura group were mapped by in situ hybridization, using the 5C actin gene of D. melanogaster as a probe. In all species but D. azteca eight actin loci were observed variously dispersed over all five (A- E) chromosomal elements. In D. azteca ten actin hybridization sites were found; four of which most probably originated by duplications or by transposition events. Although the five nearctic species differ from all other Drosophila species of the D. obscura group so far studied in the number of loci as well as in the chromosomal distribution and location of the actin loci, the uniformity of the main pattern with six actin loci throughout the genus Drosophila reinforces the hypothesis that the chromosomal elements have maintained their essential identities during the course of evolution. Our findings are in accordance with the conclusion that the nearctic D. obscura species have differentiated from a common ancestor of the palearctic species and that they belong to two distinct subgroups, the pseudoobscura and the affinis subgroups.
11862451	0	2002	Chromosoma	The actin loci in the genus Drosophila: establishment of chromosomal homologies among five palearctic species of the Drosophila obscura group by in situ hybridization.	Chromosomal homologies among the four palearctic Drosophila obscura group species D. ambigua, D. tristis, D. obscura, and D. subsilvestris and the &quot;trans-palearctic&quot; species D. bifasciata were established by in situ hybridization using the 5C actin gene of D. melanogaster as a probe. In all species two labeling sites were detected in each of chromosomal elements C and E and one in each of chromosomal elements A and D. In addition one labeling site was detected on element B for the species D. subsilvestris and D. bifasciata. The conservative distribution pattern of the genes of the actin multigene family, the similarities of the locations of the actin genes in the chromosomes of the five species studied, together with the concordant evidence of synteny of visible and other genetic markers as well as the similarities in banding patterns, all agree with the conclusion that the chromosomal elements have retained their essential identity throughout the evolution of these species. Using in situ hybridization detailed information of some homologous regions of chromosomes can also be established.
11641517	10	2001	Thorax	X-linked dyskeratosis congenita: restrictive pulmonary disease and a novel mutation.	Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is a rare inherited multisystem disorder characterised by lesions of the skin and appendages. Bone marrow failure occurs in 80% of patients. The gene for the X-linked form of DC has been identified on Xq28 and designated as DKC1. Pulmonary manifestations have rarely been reported. It is not known whether there is a respiratory disease peculiar to these patients and, if so, whether it is associated with a specific genetic mutation. A 40 year old Egyptian man with pulmonary disease and his symptom free 35 year old brother both presented with mucocutaneous lesions characteristic of DC. In the older brother chest imaging revealed generalised intralobular interstitial thickening and honeycombing. Pulmonary function tests showed a restrictive pattern. Open lung biopsy specimens of lung tissue showed various degrees of fibrosis consistent with usual interstitial pneumonia of chronic idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The younger brother was free of pulmonary lesions. Both had a novel missense mutation 5C--&gt;T in exon 1 of the DKC1 gene. It is concluded that pulmonary disease in DC may be underestimated, possibly because most patients die at an early age of bone marrow failure. No relationship between genotype and phenotype could be established in the patients studied. The genetic diagnosis of DC is now available, which may enable it to be diagnosed in patients with restrictive pulmonary disease and minimal cutaneous signs.
11675132	2	2001	Cancer Genet Cytogenet	Regional mapping of suppressor loci for anchorage independence and tumorigenicity on human chromosome 9.	By microcell-mediated chromosome transfer to the malignant Syrian hamster cell line BHK-191-5C, we previously identified two suppressor functions on human chromosome 9 (HSA9), one for anchorage independence and another for tumorigenicity. However, the precise chromosomal locations of these suppressor functions were not determined. The present study was undertaken to define the regional location of these suppressor loci using a panel of microcell hybrids containing structurally altered HSA9 with different deleted regions in the BHK-191-5C background. DNA derived from the cell hybrids was analyzed by PCR for verification of the presence of HSA9 genetic material by amplifying 62 microsatellite markers and 13 genes, covering the entire length of HSA9. Our deletion mapping data on anchorage independent and tumorigenic hybrids suggest that the suppressor function for anchorage independence is located in the region between 9q32 to 9qter. The suppressor for tumorigenicity may be located in one of three deleted regions on HSA9, the first one between the markers D9S162 and D9S1870, the second one between the markers D9S1868 and TIGRA002I21, and the third one between the markers D9S59 and D9S155.
11268493	1	2001	Anticancer Res	Prognostic significance of high microsatellite instability in a Spanish series of gastric adenocarcinomas.	In colorectal cancer different levels of microsatellite instability (MSI) have been described. MSI-H (high) characterizes a unique clinical and pathological phenotype known as hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer syndrome, whereas MSI-L (low) and MSS (stable) are considered similar phenotypes without pathological implications. MSI has been also described as a frequent genetic alteration in a subset of gastric adenocarcinomas. However, the clinicopathological and prognosis significance of this abnormality in these tumors remains unclear. To investigate the role of genetic instability in gastric carcinogenesis we examined 10 microsatellite loci in 37 patients. MSI-H was found in 37.8% patients. We observed a trend of MSI-H tumors to be associated with elderly patients, intestinal histological type, advanced clinical stages and less aggressiveness with better survival. In conclusion, MSI-H can be considered as a good prognosis factor in a subset of gastric tumors.
10767340	24	2000	Hum Mol Genet	Deletion and expression analysis of AZFa genes on the human Y chromosome revealed a major role for DBY in male infertility.	Three distinct regions, designated AZFa, b and c from proximal to distal Yq, are required for normal spermato-genesis in humans. Deletions involving AZFa (deletion interval 5C/D) seem to occur less frequently in infertile men and to be associated with a more severe testicular phenotype, with almost complete absence of germ cells. AZFa contains three genes, named USP9Y, DBY and UTY, and presents high homology with the mouse Delta Sxr (b) interval, deletion of which causes a severe spermatogenic impairment. However, the specific role of these genes in human spermatogenesis is still unknown and it is not clear which of them is responsible for the AZFa phenotype. Here we describe a complete sequence map of the AZFa region, the genomic structure of AZFa genes and their deletion analysis in a large number of infertile men characterized by well-defined spermatogenic alterations. Both USP9Y and DBY may cause severe testiculopathies, but DBY appears to be the major AZFa candidate. DBY is frequently deleted in infertile patients and its absence produces severe spermatogenic damage leading to a significant reduction of germ cells or even to their complete absence. Expression analysis of AZFa genes and their X-homologues revealed ubiquitous expression for all of them except DBY; this gene produces a long transcript which is ubiquitously expressed in addition to a shorter transcript which is only expressed in the testis, suggesting a specific role for DBY in the spermatogenic process. This hypothesis is further supported by the high similarity of DBY to other DEAD box proteins belonging to the PL10 subclass.
10644433	11	2000	Genomics	Characterization of the human glutamate receptor subunit 3 gene (GRIA3), a candidate for bipolar disorder and nonspecific X-linked mental retardation.	The X-chromosome breakpoint in a female patient with a balanced translocation t(X;12)(q24;q15), bipolar affective disorder and mental retardation was mapped within the glutamate receptor 3 (GRIA3) gene by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The GRIA3 cDNA of 5894 bp was cloned, and the gene structure and pattern of expression were determined. The most abundant GRIA3 transcript is composed of 17 exons. An additional 5 exons (2a, 2b, 5a, 5b, and 5c) from the 5' end of the GRIA3 open reading frame were identified by EST analysis (ESTs AI379066 and AA947914). Two new polymorphic microsatellite repeats, (TC)(n=12-26) and (AC)(n=15-19), were identified within GRIA3 5' and 3'UTRs. No mutations were detected in families segregating disorders mapping across GRIA3, one with X-linked bipolar affective disorder (BP) and one with a nonspecific X-linked mental retardation (MRX27). To assess the possibility of the involvement of the GRIA3 gene in familial cases of complex BP, a large set of 373 individuals from 40 pedigrees segregating BP were genotyped using closely linked (DXS1001) and intragenic (DXS1212 and GRIA3 3' UTR (AC)(n))) GRIA3 STR markers. No evidence of linkage was found by parametric Lod score analysis (the highest Lod score was 0. 3 at DXS1212, using the dominant transmission model) or by affected sib-pair analysis.
11038244	3	2000	Brain Res Mol Brain Res	A caspase-3-like protease is involved in NF-kappaB activation induced by stimulation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors in rat striatum.	Glutamate receptor stimulation reportedly activates NF-kappaB in vitro and in vivo, although underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated. Here we evaluated the role of proteases in mediating N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor agonist-induced NF-kappaB activation and apoptosis in rat striatum. The intrastriatal infusion of quinolinic acid (QA, 60 nmol) had no effect on levels of NF-kappaB family proteins, including p65, p50, p52, c-Rel and Rel B. In contrast, QA decreased IkappaB-alpha protein levels by 60% (P&lt;0. 05); other members of the IkappaB family, including IkappaB-beta, IkappaB-gamma, IkappaB-epsilon and Bcl-3, were not altered. The QA-stimulated degradation of IkappaB-alpha was completely blocked by the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801. QA-induced IkappaB-alpha degradation and NF-kappaB activation were not affected by the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 (1-4 microg). On the other hand, the caspase-3 inhibitor Ac-DEVD.CHO (2-8 microgram) blocked QA-induced IkappaB-alpha degradation in a dose-dependent manner (P&lt;0.05). Ac-DEVD.CHO (4 microgram) also substantially reduced QA-induced NF-kappaB activation (P&lt;0.05), but had no effect on QA-induced AP-1 activation. Furthermore, Ac-DEVD.CHO, but not MG-132, dose-dependently attenuated QA-induced internucleosomal DNA fragmentation. These findings suggest that NF-kappaB activation by NMDA receptor stimulation involves IkappaB-alpha degradation by a caspase-3-like cysteine protease dependent mechanism. Caspase-3 thus appears to contribute to the excitotoxin-induced apoptosis in rat striatal neurons occurring at least partially as a consequence of NF-kappaB activation.
10984842	2	2000	Genes Genet Syst	Intergenomic translocations of polyploid oats (genus Avena) revealed by genomic in situ hybridization.	Wild and cultivated hexaploid oats share the same genomes (AACCDD) and display a considerable level of interspecific variation in both plant and chromosome morphology. The GISH was utilized to detect the interspecific genomic compositions in four hexaploid and two tetraploid oats using total genomic DNA of Avena eriantha (a C-genome diploid) as probe. Intergenomic translocations between A/D and C-genome chromosomes were frequently observed in hexaploid and tetraploid species. In the hexaploid, two pairs of A/D genome segments on C-genome chromosome (A/D-C) translocation and four to six pairs of C-genome segments on A/D genome chromosome (C-A/D) translocation were clearly identified whilst the number of A/D-C translocations was constant among species. In the tetraploid A. maroccana (AACC), a pair of A-C and four pairs of C-A translocations were observed. Moreover, the A/D translocation segments on chromosome 5C was detected only in A. byzantina and A. maroccana, whilst A/D-C translocations were observed on the 1C and 7C of A. sativa, A. fatua and A. sterilis. A. byzantina did however also carry the 1C rearrangement. This result shows that A. byzantina has retained a similar genomic constitution to the tetraploid ancestor of hexaploid oats, A. maroccana. Three pairs of A-C translocations were detected only in A. murphyi (AACC), and two pairs of those were the 1C and 7C as well as the three hexaploid species except A. byzantina.
10773682	1	2000	Cytogenet Cell Genet	Evidence for suppression of cellular growth in vitro and selection against the indigenous mouse X chromosome in A9 cell hybrids after microcell-mediated transfer of an X from other mammalian species.	Introduction of a human or Syrian hamster X chromosome (derived from BHK-191-5C cell hybrids) into tumorigenic mouse A9 cells via microcell fusion induced changes in cellular morphology and a retardation of cellular growth. The suppression of growth of the hybrids could be abolished, however, by daily changes of medium containing 20% serum. G-banding analysis showed the absence of a single, cytogenetically identifiable, indigenous X chromosome (marker Z) in two of four hybrid clones after an X chromosome was transferred from either hamster or human cells. All hybrids were tumorigenic when tested in nude mice. Together, these data suggest that the loss of the mouse X chromosome took place probably because of growth inhibitory effects imposed on hybrid cells due to the increase in X chromosome dosage. In addition, our results show a lack of association between the phenotype of cellular growth suppression in vitro and the phenotype of suppression of tumorigenicity in vivo.
10773681	0	2000	Cytogenet Cell Genet	Suppressor genes for malignant and anchorage-independent phenotypes located on human chromosome 9 have no dosage effects.	We have previously shown that microcell-mediated transfer of a der(9)t(X;9) human chromosome (HSA), derived from human fibroblast strain GM0705, into the Syrian hamster cell line BHK-191-5C produced only near-tetraploid hybrids, although the recipient cell line contained a 1:1 ratio of near-diploid and near-tetraploid cells. However, the tumorigenicity and the anchorage independence could be suppressed in the near-tetraploid hybrids with one copy of the der(9)t(X;9) chromosome. The introduction of an HSA X chromosome did not suppress either of these phenotypes. We concluded that in addition to two suppressor genes, one for tumorigenicity and another for anchorage independence, HSA 9 might carry a third gene capable of inhibiting cellular growth in vitro, which had dosage effects. In the present study, keeping one copy of the der(9)t(X;9) chromosome, we have increased the hamster background chromosome number beyond hexaploid level by fusing two microcell-generated hybrid cell lines, where both malignant and anchorage-independent phenotypes were suppressed, with the parental malignant BHK-191-5C cell line. Tests with nude mice showed that hybrids containing one copy of the der(9)t(X;9) chromosome against the increased background of chromosomes of malignant parental origin were still suppressed for both phenotypes. These results suggest that the suppressor genes for malignancy and for anchorage independence have no dosage effects, in contrast to the suppressor gene(s) for cellular growth.
10762017	0	2000	J Cell Biochem Suppl	Endpoint markers for cancer chemoprevention trials derived from the lesion of precancer (intraepithelial neoplasia) measured by computer-assisted quantitative image analysis.	Endpoint markers for cancer chemoprevention clinical trials are described that are developed from the morphological properties of the precancerous lesion of intraepithelial neoplasia itself, as measured by computer-assisted quantitative image analysis. The markers include increased proliferative fraction (percentage MIB-1 positive nuclear area); nuclear DNA content (DNA ploidy), including DNA content exceeding fivefold the haploid amount (5C-exceeding rate); nuclear/nucleolar morphometry; and disorganization of nuclear chromatin pattern as characterized by Markovian parameters and other functions. A significant new advance in image analysis is the process of &quot;tiling,&quot; in which hundreds of full monitor image fields of a given histological section at x40 magnification are reduced in size and fused seamlessly to produce a single image of the histological section at x1.25 magnification. The operator may review the low-power image and retrieve x40 magnification of any desired area by point/clicking with a mouse.
10640804	0	2000	Cytogenet Cell Genet	Lack of tumor suppression but induced loss of copies of indigenous chromosome 10 in vitro following microcell-mediated transfer of a deleted human der(9)t(X;9) chromosome to Syrian hamster BHK-191-5C cells.	We have previously shown that microcell-mediated transfer of a der(9)t(X;9) chromosome, containing an almost complete human chromosome (HSA) 9 derived from the human fibroblast strain GM0705, into the Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) cell line BHK-191-5C suppressed the anchorage independence and tumorigenicity of the hybrids. Transfer of a normal HSA X did not have any effect on these phenotypes. Although the recipient cell line contained a 1:1 ratio of near-diploid and near-tetraploid cells, all hybrids retaining the der(9) chromosome were near-tetraploid, in contrast to hybrids retaining a normal X chromosome. In the present study, we have generated microcell hybrids by transferring another der(9)t(X;9) chromosome derived from the human fibroblast strain GM01429. This derivative chromosome contained a deletion on the short arm of HSA 9 and was also missing the distal part of the long arm of HSA 9 due to the involvement in a reciprocal (constitutive) translocation of this chromosome with HSA X. Cytogenetic analysis showed that all hybrid clones were near-tetraploid, confirming our previous finding. We also observed that the introduction of the deleted der(9) chromosome forced the hybrids to lose Syrian hamster chromosome 10. A soft agar test and nude mice assay indicated that none of the hybrids was suppressed for either anchorage independent growth or tumor formation. These data suggest that there is an antagonistic relationship between growth-promoting genes and antiproliferative genes. The observed dosage effects of both growth-promoting and growth-suppressing genes indicate that cellular growth may be a quantitative trait.
